                                                                                          Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE



                                           REVIEW



                                                           Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain




arXiv:2306.05635v1 [q-bio.NC] 9 Jun 2023
                                              Yang Tian1,2 and Zeren Tan3 and Hedong Hou4 and Guoqi Li5,6 and Aohua Cheng7 and Yike Qiu7 and Kangyu

                                                                                                            Weng7 and Chun Chen1 and Pei Sun1



                                                                   1
                                                                       Department of Psychology & Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.

                                                   2
                                                       Laboratory of Advanced Computing and Storage, Central Research Institute, 2012 Laboratories, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd., Beijing, 100084, China.

                                                                                  3
                                                                                      Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.

                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                         UFR de Mathématiques, Université de Paris, Paris, 75013, France.

                                                                                             5
                                                                                                 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, 100190, China.

                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                        University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, 100049, China.

                                                                   7
                                                                       Tsien Excellence in Engineering Program, School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.




                                           Keywords: Non-equilibrium criticality, Neural avalanches, Neural dynamics, Directed percolation


                                           ABSTRACT
                                           Criticality is hypothesized as a physical mechanism underlying efficient transitions between cortical
                                           states and remarkable information processing capacities in the brain. While considerable evidence
                                           generally supports this hypothesis, non-negligible controversies persist regarding the ubiquity of
                                           criticality in neural dynamics and its role in information processing. Validity issues frequently arise
                                           during identifying potential brain criticality from empirical data. Moreover, the functional benefits
                                           implied by brain criticality are frequently misconceived or unduly generalized. These problems stem
                                           from the non-triviality and immaturity of the physical theories that analytically derive brain criticality
                                           and the statistic techniques that estimate brain criticality from empirical data. To help solve these
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    problems, we present a systematic review and reformulate the foundations of studying brain criticality,
    i.e., ordinary criticality (OC), quasi-criticality (qC), self-organized criticality (SOC), and self-organized
    quasi-criticality (SOqC), using the terminology of neuroscience. We offer accessible explanations of the
    physical theories and statistic techniques of brain criticality, providing step-by-step derivations to
    characterize neural dynamics as a physical system with avalanches. We summarize error-prone details
    and existing limitations in brain criticality analysis and suggest possible solutions. Moreover, we present
    a forward-looking perspective on how optimizing the foundations of studying brain criticality can deepen
    our understanding of various neuroscience questions.



    AUTHOR SUMMARY
    Brain criticality hypothesis is one of the most focused and controversial topics in neuroscience and
    biophysics. This research develops a unified framework to reformulate the physics theories of four basic
    types of brain criticality, i.e., ordinary criticality (OC), quasi-criticality (qC), self-organized criticality
    (SOC), and self-organized quasi-criticality (SOqC), into more accessible and neuroscience-related forms.
    For the statistic techniques used to validate brain criticality hypothesis, we also present comprehensive
    explanations of them, summarize their error-prone details, and suggest possible solutions. This
    framework may help resolve potential controversies in studying brain criticality hypothesis, especially
    those arising from the misconceptions about the theoretical foundations of brain criticality.



    INTRODUCTION
    Neuroscience is dawning upon revealing physics foundations of the brain Abbott (2008). Ever since the
    1970s, the term neurophysics has been suggested as a term to indicate the essential role of physics in
    understanding the brain Scott and Alwyn (1977). More recently, substantial progress has been
    accomplished in studying brain connectivity and brain functions with statistical physics theories Lynn
    and Bassett (2019).

    For brain connectivity, physics provides insights for its emergence, organization, and evolution. Random
    graphs Betzel et al. (2016); Betzel and Bassett (2017a), percolation Breskin, Soriano, Moses, and Tlusty
    (2006); Guo et al. (2021), and other physics theories of correlated systems Haimovici, Tagliazucchi,
    Balenzuela, and Chialvo (2013); Wolf (2005) are applied to reveal the underlying mechanisms

                                                                –2–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    accounting for the origins of brain network properties. Complex network theories act as the foundation of
    characterizing brain connectivity organizational features (e.g., community Betzel and Bassett (2017b);
    Betzel, Medaglia, and Bassett (2018); Khambhati, Sizemore, Betzel, and Bassett (2018), hub Deco,
    Tononi, Boly, and Kringelbach (2015); Gong et al. (2009), and small-world Bullmore and Sporns (2012);
    Deco et al. (2015) structures) and embedding attributes into physical space Bassett et al. (2010); Kaiser
    and Hilgetag (2006). Network evolution driven by neural plasticity helps to explain the dynamics of brain
    connectivity structures during information processing Del Pozo et al. (2021); Galván (2010); Montague,
    Dayan, and Sejnowski (1996); Robert and Vignoud (2021); Song, Miller, and Abbott (2000). For brain
    functions, physics presents possible explanations for the origin of information processing capacities from
    collective neural activities. From single neuron dynamics models Gerstner, Kistler, Naud, and Paninski
    (2014), stochastic network models of neural populations and circuits Tian, Li, and Sun (2021); Tian and
    Sun (2021), mean-field neural mass models of brain regions David and Friston (2003); Touboul,
    Wendling, Chauvel, and Faugeras (2011), eventually to models of entire brain networks Hopfield (1982);
    Schneidman, Berry, Segev, and Bialek (2006), important efforts have been devoted to characterize
    information-processing-related neural dynamics across different scales. Networks with memory
    capacities (e.g., Hopfield networks Tyulmankov, Fang, Vadaparty, and Yang (2021)), which are
    equivalent to Ising models under specific conditions Lynn and Bassett (2019), have been applied to study
    neural information storage and recall Haldeman and Beggs (2005); Krotov and Hopfield (2020),
    adaptation to environment changes Shew et al. (2015), information transmission optimization Beggs and
    Plenz (2003), dynamic range maximization Kinouchi and Copelli (2006); Shew, Yang, Petermann, Roy,
    and Plenz (2009), and neural computation power Bertschinger and Natschläger (2004). These models are
    further related to maximum entropy models (e.g., specific fine-tuned Ising models) that predict
    long-range correlations observed among neurons Ganmor, Segev, and Schneidman (2011); Schneidman
    et al. (2006). Moreover, general theories of free-energy principle Friston (2009, 2010); Guevara (2021)
    and information thermodynamics Capolupo, Freeman, and Vitiello (2013); Collell and Fauquet (2015);
    Sartori, Granger, Lee, and Horowitz (2014); Tian and Sun (2022) are suggested as the unified foundations
    of perception, action, and learning in the brain.


    If one needs to specify one of the most focused and controversial topics among all the works mentioned
    above, brain criticality may be a potential candidate Beggs and Timme (2012). The hypothesis of the

                                                                –3–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    critical brain has received increasing attention in recent decades, serving as a possible mechanism
    underlying various intriguing but elusive phenomena in the brain. In light of our limited understanding of
    the complex nature of collective neural dynamics, these phenomena include, to name a few, efficient
    transitions between cortical states Fontenele et al. (2019), maximal dynamic ranges of neural responses
    Antonopoulos (2016); Gautam, Hoang, McClanahan, Grady, and Shew (2015); Kinouchi and Copelli
    (2006); Shew et al. (2009), optimized information transmission and representation Antonopoulos (2016);
    X. Li and Small (2012); Shew, Yang, Yu, Roy, and Plenz (2011), and numerous other issues concerning
    brain functions that we have mentioned above. One can see Beggs (2007); Chialvo (2010); Cocchi,
    Gollo, Zalesky, and Breakspear (2017); Hesse and Gross (2014); Shew and Plenz (2013) for systematic
    reviews of the diverse function advantages implied by brain criticality and their experimental
    demonstrations. From a Darwinian perspective, one potential reason for the brain to feature criticality lay
    in that the most informative parts of external world principally occur at a borderline between purely
    ordered and purely disordered states (information would be trivial in a purely ordered world while it
    would be incomprehensible in a purely disordered world). Becoming critical may be a potential way for
    the brain to adapt to the complex world, where non-trivial information has a finite opportunity to occur
    Bak (2013); Chialvo (2010). To date, generic features of a critical brain with the characteristics discussed
    above, such as divergent correlation length, neuronal avalanches with power-law behaviours, and
    long-range correlations on the microscopic scale (e.g., neural populations), have been extensively
    observed in mathematical models in conjunction with experimental data (e.g., Beggs and Plenz (2003);
    Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019); Fosque, Williams-Garcı́a, Beggs, and Ortiz (2021); Gireesh and Plenz
    (2008); Hardstone, Mansvelder, and Linkenkaer-Hansen (2014); Petermann et al. (2009); Poil,
    Hardstone, Mansvelder, and Linkenkaer-Hansen (2012); Poil, van Ooyen, and Linkenkaer-Hansen
    (2008); Ponce-Alvarez, Jouary, Privat, Deco, and Sumbre (2018); G. Scott et al. (2014); Shew et al.
    (2009); Shriki et al. (2013); Tagliazucchi, Balenzuela, Fraiman, and Chialvo (2012); Tkačik et al. (2015)).


    Our work does not aim at repeatedly reviewing experimental advances concerning brain criticality and its
    biological significance, given that they have been comprehensively summarized by existing reviews
    Beggs (2007); Chialvo (2010); Cocchi et al. (2017); Hesse and Gross (2014); Munoz (2018); Shew and
    Plenz (2013). On the contrary, our motivation is to present a systematic and accessible review of the
    theoretical methods applied to achieve these advances, which have not received necessary attention yet.

                                                                –4–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    These theoretical foundations are initially thought to be incomprehensible and irrelevant to neuroscience.
    However, practice suggests that omitting these physical and mathematical backgrounds does not
    significantly improve the accessibility of studies on brain criticality. Instead, the lack of detailed
    explanations of theoretical foundations has frequently misled neuroscientists, leading to diverse
    confusions about the precise meaning, identification criteria, and biological corollaries of brain criticality.
    As a result, criticality, an analytic statistical physics theory with solid foundations, unnecessarily
    becomes an elusive black box for neuroscientists. To address this issue, we use the terminology of
    neuroscience to present a self-contained framework of brain criticality, reviewing and reformulating (1)
    physical theories that analytically derive brain criticality and (2) statistic techniques that computationally
    estimate brain criticality from empirical data. Given the frequent misunderstanding of neural avalanches,
    our discussions primarily focus on brain criticality analysis on the microscopic scale of the brain. The
    objectives guiding through our review are tripartite: (1) explaining why brain criticality matters in the
    brain, (2) understanding what is brain criticality and what it conveys about the brain, and (3) confirming
    how to identify potential brain criticality and ensure the validity of analyses.

    BRAIN CRITICALITY: GENERAL CONCEPTS
    Overview of brain criticality
    Brain criticality frequently confuses neuroscientists since too many distinct phenomena are studied under
    this name without being properly classified. In this review, brain criticality refers to a family of critical
    processes in neural dynamics where erratic fluctuations appear to reduce dynamic stability. To present a
    systematic classification framework, we discuss three fundamental perspectives concerning brain
    criticality. Table 1 provides all the necessary glossaries in comprehensible forms.


    Being non-equilibrium        First, the brain, similar to other biological systems, generally exhibits temporal
    evolution from initial states that are far away from equilibrium Gnesotto, Mura, Gladrow, and Broedersz
    (2018); Lynn, Cornblath, Papadopoulos, Bertolero, and Bassett (2021). These departures from
    equilibrium arise due to diverse endogenous causes Gnesotto et al. (2018); Perl et al. (2021) to break the
    detailed balance to support consciousness, sensing, and adaptation Lynn et al. (2021); Perl et al. (2021).
    Therefore, potential critical phenomena underlying neural dynamics, at least in most neural dynamics
    models and empirical data sets, are basically non-equilibrium and can not be characterized by




                                                                –5–
                                                            == D R A F T             ==
                  Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun



                                               Table 1.   Key concepts in describing brain criticality


    Concept              Meaning

                         A case where the system maximizes entropy and conserves energy simultaneously. The stationary

                         probability distribution Peq (·) of system states of a system at equilibrium is the Boltzmann distribution.
    Equilibrium
                         At equilibrium, the transition dynamics between system states c and c′ satisfies the detailed balance

                         condition Peq (c) W (c → c′ ) = Peq (c′ ) W (c′ → c), where W (· → ·) denotes the transition probability.

                         A case where the system is out of equilibrium because the transition dynamics between system states

    Non-equilibrium      breaks the detailed balance condition. In other words, the transition dynamics between states becomes

                         directional rather than symmetric.

                         A process where the internal complexity of a system increases without being tuned by any external

    Self-organization    mechanism. All potentially emergent properties are created by endogenous feedback processes or other

                         internal factors inside the system.

                         A kind of phenomena where the systems is generally close to specific critical points separating between

    Criticality          multiple system states. Small disturbances are sufficient to make the system experience dramatic and

                         sharp transitions between system states.

                         A kind of phenomena where all statistical physics relations required by criticality are principally adhered

    Quasi-criticality    by the system but slight and inconstant deviations from perfect criticality can be seen on the actual values

                         of characteristic variables. These deviations robustly exist and are generally independent of data noises.

                         A kind of system states below criticality. They occur when the order parameter (i.e., the macroscopic

    Sub-criticality      observable used to describe system states) remains at zero even with the addition of derives, corresponding

                         to disordered system dynamics.

                         A kind of system states above criticality. They occur when the order parameter is positive, corresponding
    Super-criticality
                         to ordered system dynamics.




    equilibrium statistic mechanics. In Fig. 1A, we illustrate the difference between equilibrium and
    non-equilibrium dynamics.

                                                                        –6–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Fine tuning versus self-organization       Second, there exist two types of general mechanisms underlying the
    existence of brain criticality. One type of mechanisms either arise from the external manipulations
    outside the brain (e.g., researchers manipulate the tonic dopamine D1-receptor stimulation Stewart and
    Plenz (2006, 2008) or adjust network topology Kaiser and Hilgetag (2010); Rubinov, Sporns, Thivierge,
    and Breakspear (2011); S. Wang and Zhou (2012)) or belong to the top-down biological processes that
    globally function on neural dynamics inside the brain (e.g., anesthesia effects Fontenele et al. (2019);
    Hahn et al. (2017); Ribeiro et al. (2010) as well as sleep restoration effects Meisel, Olbrich, Shriki, and
    Achermann (2013)). Neural dynamics is passively fine tuned towards or away from ordinary criticality
    (OC) by these exogenous mechanisms, similar to ordinary critical phenomena that require the fine tuning
    of order parameters.

    Another type of mechanisms includes all endogenous factors of neural dynamics (e.g., neural plasticity
    mechanisms such as spike-timing dependent synaptic plasticity Effenberger, Jost, and Levina (2015);
    Meisel and Gross (2009); Shin and Kim (2006), short-term synaptic plasticity Levina, Herrmann, and
    Geisel (2007, 2009), retro-synaptic signals Hernandez-Urbina and Herrmann (2017) and Hebbian rules
    de Arcangelis and Herrmann (2010); De Arcangelis, Perrone-Capano, and Herrmann (2006)), which
    locally function on neural dynamics as drive and dissipation components. The interactions between these
    components naturally form feedback control loops to support the self-organization of neural dynamics
    towards the critical point Beggs (2007); Chialvo (2010). This spontaneously emerged brain criticality,
    distinct from ordinary critical phenomena, is conjectured as a kind of self-organized criticality (SOC)
    Chialvo (2010). In Fig. 1B, we present conceptual illustrations of ordinary criticality and self-organized
    criticality in the brain.


    Standard versus non-standard        Third, brain criticality frequently occurs in non-standard forms due to
    stimulus derives or endogenous factors. On the one hand, slight and inconstant deviations from perfect
    brain criticality can be seen on the actual values of characteristic variables, differentiating the
    characterized phenomena from the standard criticality Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a, Moore,
    Beggs, and Ortiz (2014). On the other hand, all statistical physics relations required by perfect brain
    criticality are still adhered by these actual characteristic variables, distinguishing the brain from being
    non-critical Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014).



                                                                –7–
                                                        == D R A F T            ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




                                             Figure 1. Please see the caption on the next page.




                                                                   –8–
                                                                         == D R A F T              ==
                  Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE                          /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Figure 1. Conceptual illustrations of brain criticality. A, Difference between equilibrium and non-equilibrium dynamics in a three-state brain (upper parallel).

    Brain states are characterized by three system components. We illustrate an instance of non-equilibrium dynamics between these states (bottom parallel). B,

    Fine tuning with exogenous mechanisms (represented by animated hands) makes the brain evolve from a non-critical state (upper left) to the critical state

    (upper right). Endogenous mechanisms enable the brain to self-organize from a non-critical state (bottom left) to the critical state (bottom right). C Increasing

    stimulus intensity enlarges the quasi-critical region around the perfect critical point in a quasi-critical system. D The approaching process to a critical point in a

    self-organized quasi-critical system consists of two stages. In the first stage, the brain self-organizes from a non-critical state to a quasi-critical region based on

    certain endogenous mechanisms. In the second stage, additional exogenous mechanisms are necessary to fine tune the brain to the critical point. Otherwise, the

    brain just hovers within the quasi-critical region. E The difference between four types of brain criticality from the perspective of susceptibility. For standard

    brain criticality (e.g., ordinary criticality and self-organized criticality), susceptibility becomes divergent (i.e., infinite) at the critical point. For non-standard

    brain criticality (e.g., quasi-criticality and self-organized quasi-criticality), susceptibility is always non-divergent (i.e., finite). The quasi-critical region is

    defined as a set of all control parameters where susceptibility values are no less than a specific threshold (e.g., half-maximum value). F The commonness and

    difference between four types of brain criticality.




    For ordinary criticality, its non-standard form is referred to as quasi-criticality (qC) Fosque et al. (2021);
    Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). Diverse mechanisms can force the brain to depart from perfect ordinary
    criticality and exhibit quasi-critical neural dynamics, among which, stimulus derive may be the most
    common one Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). In general, sufficiently strong stimulus
    drives can capture or even govern neural dynamics. Similar to the situation where external inputs
    suppress irregular neural dynamics Molgedey, Schuchhardt, and Schuster (1992), the stimuli that are too
    strong may evoke intense but less changeable neural dynamics to make the brain depart from the perfect
    critical point Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). Let us take the qC phenomenon
    introduced by Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014) as an instance. Under specific
    conditions, the actual brain state may be close to a Widom line in the three-dimensional space defined by
    the stimulus intensity υ, refractory period length τ , and branching ratio κ (i.e., the time-dependent
    average number of subsequent neural activities caused by a single neuron activation event Haldeman and
    Beggs (2005)). The Widom line is a line of all the combinations of (υ, τ, κ) where the susceptibility of
    neural dynamics is maximized Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). The susceptibility is
                      ∂y
    defined by limx→0 ∂x , where y is the neural dynamics state and x denotes a factor that affects y. In


                                                                                     –9–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    general, one can understand susceptibility as the degree to which fluctuations in the state of each neuron
    can propagate to neighbored neurons Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). Being close to the Widom line
    suggests the existence of quasi-criticality in the brain. Moving along the Widom line as the stimulus
    intensity increases, the susceptibility of neural dynamics decreases, and the branching ratio at maximal
    susceptibility will decrease as well Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). Significant
    deviations from the Widom line suggest non-criticality (i.e., the sub-criticality where neural dynamics is
    disordered and the super-criticality where neural dynamics is ordered Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014)). In
    Fig. 1C, we conceptually illustrate how stimuli imply qC in the brain. In Fig. 2D, the qC phenomenon in
    Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014) is shown in details.


    As for self-organized criticality (SOC), its non-standard form is defined according to statistical physics
    criteria. Perfect self-organized criticality only exists in conserved neural dynamics (e.g., see
    integrate-and-fire neurons analyzed by Levina et al. (2007)), where system energy (i.e., neural activities)
    either conserves within the system and only dissipates at the system boundary, or dissipates inside the
    system (i.e., bulk dissipation) with a dissipation rate vanishing in the system size limit Malcai, Shilo, and
    Biham (2006). Under more general conditions where neural dynamics is not conserved (e.g., see leaky
    integrate-and-fire neurons analyzed by Levina et al. (2007); Millman, Mihalas, Kirkwood, and Niebur
    (2010); Rubinov et al. (2011); Stepp, Plenz, and Srinivasa (2015), where neural dynamics dissipates
    within the system due to voltage leak), perfect self-organized criticality can be broken by any rate of bulk
    dissipation Bonachela, De Franciscis, Torres, and Munoz (2010); Bonachela and Munoz (2009);
    Buendı́a, di Santo, Villegas, Burioni, and Muñoz (2020); de Andrade Costa, Copelli, and Kinouchi
    (2015). Stronger bulk dissipation implies larger deviations from perfect self-organized criticality
    De Arcangelis et al. (2006). Consequently, the self-organization process of non-conserved neural
    dynamics only make the brain hover around the critical point. Any further closeness towards the critical
    point requires the fine tuning of order parameter by additional exogenous mechanisms, which is different
    from pure self-organized criticality Bonachela et al. (2010); Bonachela and Munoz (2009); Buendı́a, di
    Santo, et al. (2020); de Andrade Costa et al. (2015). This non-conserved self-organization process is
    termed as self-organized quasi-criticality (SOqC) Bonachela and Munoz (2009). Similar to SOC in
    conserved dynamics, neural plasticity mechanisms, such as spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity
    Rubinov et al. (2011), Hebbian rules De Arcangelis et al. (2006), short-term synaptic depression in

                                                               –10–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    conjunction with spike-dependent threshold increase Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021), and inhibitory
    plasticity in conjunction with network topology Ma, Turrigiano, Wessel, and Hengen (2019), can serve as
    underlying self-organization mechanisms of SOqC. Because purely conserved neural dynamics is
    relatively rare in empirical data (e.g., neural dynamics is conserved for integrate-and-fire neurons Levina
    et al. (2007) and leaky integrate-and-fire neurons whose pre-synaptic inputs are exactly equal to the sum
    of voltage leak and potential costs during neural spiking Bonachela et al. (2010)), we suggest that SOqC
    may be more common in the brain than SOC. In Fig. 1D, we present conceptual instances of the
    two-stage approaching process towards the critical point in the brain with SOqC.


    Classification of brain criticality    The above discussion has presented a classification framework of brain
    criticality, i.e., ordinary criticality (OC), quasi-criticality (qC), self-organized criticality (SOC), and
    self-organized quasi-criticality (SOqC). In Fig. 1E, we compare between these four types of brain
    criticality in term of susceptibility. In general, susceptibility diverges at the critical point in a brain with
    standard criticality (e.g., OC and SOC) while it does not diverge in the quasi-critical region of a brain
    with non-standard criticality (e.g., qC and SOqC). In Fig. 1F, we summarize the commonness and
    difference between these four types of brain criticality discussed in our review. From a neuroscience
    perspective, a brain with critical neural dynamics is expected to be near the critical point and prepared for
    tremendous changes in cortical states during a short duration. This intriguing property coincides with the
    experimentally observed efficient transitions between cortical states (e.g., Cardin (2019); Holcman and
    Tsodyks (2006); Jercog et al. (2017); H. Lee, Wang, and Hudetz (2020); Reimer et al. (2014)) and,
    therefore, interests researchers for the potential existence of brain criticality. The importance of
    identifying brain criticality in neural dynamics is beyond brain criticality itself because it implies an
    opportunity to explain and predict brain function characteristics by various statistical physics theories
    built on non-equilibrium criticality.

    Neural avalanches and their phases
    To identify potential non-equilibrium criticality in the brain, researchers actually characterize neural
    dynamics as a physical system with absorbing states and avalanche behaviors Hinrichsen (2000);
    Larremore, Carpenter, Ott, and Restrepo (2012); Lübeck (2004). In general, one need to consider the
    propagation of neural dynamics where neurons are either activated (“on” state) or silent (”off” state)
    Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019). An silent neuron may be activated with a probability defined by the


                                                               –11–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    number of activated pre-synaptic neurons and the coupling strength θ among neurons (e.g., neural
    correlation Franke et al. (2016)). An activated neuron spontaneously becomes silent at a constant rate
    (e.g., after the refractory period Kinouchi and Copelli (2006); Squire et al. (2012)). These definitions
    naturally support to distinguish between different phases of neural dynamics. Here we review two kinds
    of phase partition that are active in neuroscience.


    Absorbing versus active       The first group of phases are absorbing and active phases Larremore et al.
    (2012). The absorbing phase refers to cases where couplings between neurons are weak and all neurons
    eventually become silent (neural dynamics vanishes). Once a neural dynamics process vanishes, it can
    not reappear by itself. The brain requires new drives (e.g., neurons activated spontaneously or by stimuli)
    to trigger new neural dynamics. The active phase, on the other hand, correspond to cases where “on”
    state propagates among neurons with strong couplings, leading to stable self-sustained neural dynamics
    (e.g., non-zero time- and ensemble-averaged density of active neurons in the brain). In Fig. 2A, we show
    conceptual instances of neural avalanches, self-sustained neural dynamics, and vanished neural
    dynamics. Denoting ρ (t) as the density of active neurons at moment t, we can simply represent the
    absorbing (Eq. (1)) and active (Eq. (2)) phases of a neural dynamics process triggered by an active
    neuron at moment 0 as


                                                       ρ (t) = 0, ∃t > 0,                                                         (1)

                                                       ρ (t) > 0, ∀t > 0.                                                         (2)



    Synchronous versus asynchronous          The second group of phases are synchronous and asynchronous
    phases Di Santo, Villegas, Burioni, and Muñoz (2018); Fontenele et al. (2019); Girardi-Schappo et al.
    (2021). As their names suggest, these two phases correspond to the situations where synchronization
    emerges or disappears in neural activities, respectively. Synchronization refers to the cases where “on”
    states appear in an oscillatory, although not strictly periodic, manner. To quantify its potential existence,
    we can measure the variability of neural dynamics using the coefficient of variation (CV) Di Santo et al.
    (2018); Fontenele et al. (2019); Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021) or the Kuramoto order parameter Acebrón,
    Bonilla, Pérez Vicente, Ritort, and Spigler (2005); Arenas, Dı́az-Guilera, Kurths, Moreno, and Zhou
    (2008). CV can be defined from diverse perspectives, yet the most common definition is the ratio

                                                               –12–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    between the standard deviation and the mean of the inter-spike interval length Di Santo et al. (2018);
    Fontenele et al. (2019); Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021). A higher value of CV implies the reduction of
    synchronization. For most neural dynamics data, an empirical choice of the CV threshold that separates
    between synchronous and asynchronous phases may be ≃ 1 Fontenele et al. (2019) or ≃ 32 Fontenele et
    al. (2019). The Kuramoto order parameter ω ∈ [0, 1] measures the coherent degree of neural dynamics
    based on the Kuramoto model of oscillators (see Acebrón et al. (2005); Arenas et al. (2008) for detailed
    definitions). Perfect synchronization emerges when ω = 1 and vanishes when ω = 0 Acebrón et al.
    (2005); Arenas et al. (2008).


    Critical point or quasi-critical region     The boundary between these two phases is the critical point, at
    which the brain is on the edge of exhibiting self-sustained (for absorbing and active phases) or
    synchronous (for synchronous and asynchronous phases) neural dynamics. Perturbations (e.g., the
    propagation of “on” state among neurons) to the absorbing or asynchronous phase do not have
    characteristic lifetime and size. These perturbations, referred to as neural avalanches, are expected to
    exhibit power-law properties in their lifetime (time difference between the first and last activation of
    neurons in between complete quiescent epochs) and size (number of active neurons along with the
    excursion) distributions Hesse and Gross (2014); Hinrichsen (2000); Larremore et al. (2012); Lübeck
    (2004). In general, the emergence of neural avalanches implies the slowing down of neural dynamics,
    i.e., the brain state recovery process towards the baseline state after fluctuations changes from fast
    (exponential) to slow (power-law) Cocchi et al. (2017); Hesse and Gross (2014). The dynamic stability of
    neural dynamics is limited by the slow recovery and, therefore, can not robustly counteract perturbations.
    Consequently, small perturbations initiated on the microscopic scale may still make the brain change
    sharply on the macroscopic scale Cocchi et al. (2017); Hesse and Gross (2014). In Fig. 2B, we
    conceptually illustrate how the recovery process slows down when the brain is close to the critical point
    or the quasi-critical region.

    General relations between neural avalanches and brain criticality
    The relation between neural avalanches and brain criticality is frequently neglected or misunderstood.
    Neural avalanche data alone is not sufficient to determine the concrete type of brain criticality (i.e., OC,
    qC, SOC, and SOqC) unless additional information about the mechanisms underlying neural avalanche
    emergence is provided (e.g., if neural dynamics is conserved or self-organizing). To explore a concrete


                                                               –13–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    type of brain criticality, researchers need to explicitly present its definition depending on different control
    parameters (e.g., the balance between excitatory and inhibitory neurons in CROS models Hardstone et al.
    (2014); Poil et al. (2012)) and order parameters (e.g., active neuron density and synchronous degree
    Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019)). A brain criticality hypothesis without strict definitions of control and
    order parameters is not informative Cocchi et al. (2017); Girardi-Schappo (2021). To present conceptual
    instances, we illustrate four possible critical phenomena in Fig. 2, each of which corresponds to a
    concrete brain criticality type.


    Instance of ordinary criticality     To produce ordinary criticality (OC), we can control neural dynamics and
    manipulate ⟨θ⟩, the expectation of coupling strength θ among all neurons (e.g., averaged neural
    correlation), by some top-down and global biological effects. These effects, for instance, may be
    anesthesia effects (e.g., by ketamine-xylazine Ribeiro et al. (2010) and isoflurane Hahn et al. (2017)) or
    sleep restoration effects Meisel et al. (2013). We use the Kuramoto order parameter ω Acebrón et al.
    (2005); Arenas et al. (2008) as the order parameter to define synchronous and asynchronous phases
    Di Santo et al. (2018); Fontenele et al. (2019). As ⟨θ⟩ increases, we may see transitions from
    asynchronous to synchronous phase in some situations (see a similar instance in Villegas, Moretti, and
    Munoz (2014)). One can see Fig. 2C for conceptual illustrations.




                                                               –14–
                                                        == D R A F T            ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




                                             Figure 2. Please see the caption on the next page.




                                                                   –15–
                                                                       == D R A F T              ==
                  Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE                         /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Figure 2. Conceptual illustrations of the relations between neural avalanches and brain criticality. A, Instances of neural avalanche, self-sustained neural

    dynamics, and vanished neural dynamics. B, The recovery processes of brain states after the same perturbation in the space of absorbing and active phases

    (upper parallel) and the space of synchronous and asynchronous phases (bottom parallel). The recovery processes after perturbations are relatively fast when

    the brain is far from the critical point or the quasi-critical region, These recovery processes slow down when the brain is close to the critical point or the

    quasi-critical region. C The conceptual illustrations of neural dynamics when the brain state is asynchronous, synchronous, or at ordinary criticality. D Without

    stimuli, there initially exist disordered (gray), ordered but asynchronous (light blue), synchronous (green) phases in the phase space of the brain. Stimulus inputs

    imply quasi-criticality in the brain. An increasing stimulus intensity enlarges the quasi-critical region (purple) around the Widom line (purple dashed line). E

    The conceptual illustrations of how endogenous mechanisms in conserved neural dynamics can function as drive or dissipation terms to create self-organized

    criticality between absorbing and active phases in the brain. F In the self-organized quasi-critical brain, endogenous mechanisms in non-conserved neural

    dynamics only support the self-organization towards a quasi-critical region between asynchronous and synchronous phases. Extra exogenous mechanisms are

    required to fine tune the brain towards the critical point.




    Instance of quasi-criticality                 To produce quasi-criticality (qC), we can manipulate refractory period
    length τ , branching ratio κ, and stimulus intensity υ as control parameters (e.g., control τ and κ by
    pharmacological perfusion or ionic concentration adjustment Chiappalone et al. (2003); Shew et al.
    (2011)). There exist a disordered phase (sub-critical), an ordered but asynchronous phase (super-critical),
    and a synchronous (quasi-periodic) phase in the space of (υ, τ, κ) Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a
    et al. (2014). These phases can be characterized by specific order parameters related to synchronization.
    As υ increases, a qC phenomenon emerges in the space, where the quasi-critical region is defined by all
    combinations of (υ, τ, κ) whose susceptibility values are at least half-maximum. Cross-over behaviours
    (i.e., a generalization of phase transition with finite susceptibility) emerge when the quasi-critical region
    has overlaps with at least two phases Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). In Fig. 2D, we
    show this qC phenomenon in details.


    Instance of self-organized criticality                    To study self-organized criticality (SOC), we consider the conserved
    neural dynamics generated by integrate-and-fire neurons Levina et al. (2007). The order parameter is
    active neuron density ρ, whose dynamics is controlled by parameter ⟨θ⟩A , the averaged coupling strength
    θ between activated neurons and their post-synaptic neurons (here A denotes the set of activated

                                                                                  –16–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    neurons). In specific cases, the considered neural dynamics may self-organize to the critical point under
    the joint effects of excitatory and inhibitory neurons, neural spiking processes (activation and silence), as
    well as neural plasticity. In Fig. 2E, we conceptually illustrate a case where these endogenous
    mechanisms enable the brain to self-organize to the criticality between absorbing and active phases.


    Instance of self-organized quasi-criticality     To analyze self-organized quasi-criticality (SOqC), we
    consider the non-conserved neural dynamics affected by two homeostatic adaptation processes, i.e., the
    short-term depression of inhibition and the spike-dependent threshold increase. These processes are
    controlled by yb, the maximum inhibitory coupling strength, as well as τx and τy , the decay time scales of
    neural activation threshold increase and synaptic depression. These control parameters affect neural
    activation threshold x and inhibition strength y to shape neural dynamics states (e.g., the active neuron
    density ρ). With appropriate x, y, and ρ, neural avalanches with power-law behaviours will occur to
    indicate the criticality between an asynchronous phase (stochastic oscillations) and a synchronous phase
    (periodic oscillations). According to Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021), x and ρ self-organize to their
    appropriate values through quasi-critical fluctuations under biologically reasonable conditions (i.e.,
    τx ≫ 1) while y hovers around the expected value. Additional fine tuning of y based on exogenous
    mechanisms are necessary to place neural dynamics at the perfect criticality. Meanwhile, synaptic
    homeostasis is discovered as constantly canceled by the variation of the activation threshold, impeding
    neural dynamics from self-organizing to perfect criticality. In Fig. 2F, we conceptually illustrate the
    defined SOqC phenomenon in a similar manner of Fig. 2D and Fig. 2E. As for the precise description of
    quasi-critical fluctuations, one can see Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021) for details.



    To this point, we have conceptually introduced the phenomenological properties of brain criticality. To
    verify the hypothetical brain criticality, one need to learn about analytic brain criticality theories and the
    properties of neural avalanche predicted by them. Below, we present accessible expositions of these
    theoretical foundations.

    BRAIN CRITICALITY: PHYSICAL THEORIES
    Mean field and stochastic field theories of brain criticality
    One of the main challenges faced by neuroscientists in studying ordinary criticality (OC),
    quasi-criticality (qC), self-organized criticality (SOC), and self-organized quasi-criticality (SOqC) is how

                                                               –17–
                                                       == D R A F T         ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    to understand their theoretical relations Girardi-Schappo (2021). Overcoming this challenge is crucial for
    understanding why we can verify the existence of different types of brain criticality with certain
    theoretical tools. To present a concise and thorough review, we first focus on brain criticality between
    absorbing and active phases, where we generalize the idea in Bonachela and Munoz (2009); Buendı́a,
    Di Santo, Bonachela, and Muñoz (2020) to present a possible framework for unification.


    Langevin formulation of ordinary criticality        In general, brain criticality in the space of absorbing and
    active phases are related to directed percolation Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019), a universality class of
    continuous phase transitions into absorbing states Hinrichsen (2000); Lübeck (2004). Here a universality
    class can be understood as the set of all systems with the same scaling properties Hinrichsen (2000);
    Lübeck (2004); Sethna, Dahmen, and Myers (2001). Directed percolation theory initially covers OC
    phenomena Hinrichsen (2000); Lübeck (2004). Let us begin with a variant of the classic Reggeon field
    theory, the simplest description of absorbing phase transitions Henkel, Hinrichsen, Lübeck, and
    Pleimling (2008). The Langevin equation of the activity neuron field ρ (⃗x, t) is defined as


                  ∂                                                                          p
                     ρ (⃗x, t) = (a + bν (⃗x, t)) ρ (⃗x, t) − cρ2 (⃗x, t) + d∇2 ρ (⃗x, t) + e ρ (⃗x, t)σ (⃗x, t) ,                (3)
                  ∂t
                  ∂
                     ν (⃗x, t) = ∇2 ν (⃗x, t) + f (⃗x, t) − g (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x, t) ,                                                 (4)
                  ∂t


    where ⃗x represents spatial coordinates, a ∈ R, b ∈ (0, ∞), c ∈ (0, ∞), d ∈ R is the diffusion factor, and
    e ∈ R is the noise factor. Function σ (·, ·) defines a zero-mean Gaussian noise with a spatio-temporal
    correlation ⟨ρ (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x′ , t′ )⟩ = δ (⃗x − ⃗x′ ) δ (t − t′ ), where δ (·) is the delta function. In general, σ (·, ·)
    reflects the collective fluctuations in neural activities that vanish in the absorbing phase ρ (⃗x, t) = 0 under
                          p
    the effects of factor ρ (⃗x, t). The term ∇2 ρ (⃗x, t) reflects the propagation of neural dynamics. The
    function ν (⃗x, t) defines the energy (i.e., membrane potential) that propagates according to ∇2 ν (⃗x, t),
    increases with external drives f (⃗x, t), and decreases with bulk dissipation g (⃗x, t). Please note that
    ρ (⃗x, t) ≥ 0 and ν (⃗x, t) ≥ 0 always hold. The initial active neuron density and energy are assumed as
    non-zero. It is clear that a + bν (⃗x, t) < 0 makes the neural dynamics eventually vanish (i.e., absorbing
    phase) while a + bν (⃗x, t) > 0 does not (i.e., active phase). Therefore, we can fine tune the control
    parameter ν (⃗x, t) to make the brain exhibit OC dynamics at a + bνc (⃗x, t) = 0, a critical point defined by
    νc . The fine tuning relies on manipulating f (⃗x, t) and g (⃗x, t) by exogenous mechanisms.

                                                                –18–
                                                       == D R A F T         ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Langevin formulation of quasi-criticality        Then we turn to analyzing qC, whose mean field approximation
    is initially derived based on the cortical branching model Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al.
    (2014). A cortical branching model with no stimulus input belongs to directed percolation universality
    class according to the Janssen-Grassberger conjecture Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). Non-zero stimulus
    inputs make the cortical branching model depart from directed percolation universality class to create qC
    Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014). Nevertheless, the above mean field theory is defined in the space of
    synchronous and asynchronous phases. To derive a qC phenomenon between absorbing and active
    phases, we can provisionally analyze a mean field approximation of Eqs. (3-4)

                                      ∂
                                         ρ (⃗x, t) = (a + bν (⃗x, t)) ρ (⃗x, t) − cρ2 (⃗x, t) ,                                    (5)
                                      ∂t
                                      ∂
                                         ν (⃗x, t) = f (⃗x, t) − g (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x, t) ,                                             (6)
                                      ∂t

    where ∇2 ρ (⃗x, t), ∇2 ν (⃗x, t), and σ (⃗x, t) in Eqs. (3-4) are neglected under the mean field assumption.
    We consider the cases where stimulus inputs vanish, i.e., f (⃗x, t) ≡ 0. The critical point between active
    and absorbing phase becomes νc = − ab . The steady state solutions of Eqs. (5-6) are


                                                     ρ (⃗x, t) = 0,                                                                (7)

                                                     ν (⃗x, t) = r ∈ (0, ∞) ,                                                      (8)


    respectively. Therefore, OC is one of the steady states of neural dynamics when there is no stimulus. In
    the cases where stimulus inputs become increasingly strong, there exists no steady state solution of Eqs.
    (5-6) unless fg(⃗
                   (⃗
                    x,t)
                    x,t)
                         → r ∈ (0, ∞). If fg(⃗
                                            (⃗
                                             x,t)
                                             x,t)
                                                  → r ∈ (0, ∞) holds, we can derive

                                                   f (⃗x, t)
                                       ρ (⃗x, t) =            → r,                                                                 (9)
                                                   g (⃗x, t)
                                                                      
                                                   1      f (⃗x, t)      1
                                       ν (⃗x, t) =      c           − a → (cr − a) .                                              (10)
                                                   b      g (⃗x, t)      b

    Because the critical point νc = − ab is not necessarily a steady state, it can be disturbed by diverse factors
    (e.g., by stimuli). Unless there exist certain ideal exogenous mechanisms that persistently enlarge g (⃗x, t)
    whenever f (⃗x, t) increases, the fine tuning of neural dynamics can not cancel the effects of f (⃗x, t).
    Consequently, the fine tuning process may only enable the brain to reach a quasi-critical region where the
    susceptibility of neural dynamics is relatively large. The initial OC vanishes and is replaced by qC.

                                                               –19–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Langevin formulation of self-organized criticality       Although SOC is treated as a rather isolated concept
    after its first discovery in statistical physics Bak, Tang, and Wiesenfeld (1987), subsequent analyses
    demonstrate SOC as relevant with ordinary continuous phase transitions into infinitely many absorbing
    states Dickman, Muñoz, Vespignani, and Zapperi (2000); Dickman, Vespignani, and Zapperi (1998);
    Narayan and Middleton (1994); Sornette, Johansen, and Dornic (1995). Specifically, SOC models can be
    subdivided into two families, which we refer to as external dynamics family (e.g., Bak-Sneppen model
    Bak and Sneppen (1993)) and conserved field family (e.g., sandpile models such as Manna model Manna
    (1991) and Bak-Tang- Wiesenfeld model Bak et al. (1987)). The second family, being the main
    theoretical source of studying SOC in neural dynamics, corresponds to absorbing-state transitions since it
    can represent any system with conserved local dynamics and continuous transitions to absorbing states
    Dickman et al. (2000); Lübeck (2004). Although the universality class of the second family should be
    precisely referred to as conserved directed percolation, the explicit behaviours (e.g., avalanche exponents
    and scaling relations) of conserved directed percolation are similar to those of directed percolation in
    high-dimensional systems (e.g., neural dynamics) Bonachela and Muñoz (2008); Bonachela and Munoz
    (2009); Buendı́a, Di Santo, et al. (2020). Therefore, SOC and OC share some identification criteria in
    practice. To understand the connections between SOC and OC more precisely, we can consider the cases
    where f (⃗x, t) → 0 such that fg(⃗
                                    (⃗
                                     x,t)
                                     x,t)
                                          → 0 (i.e., infinite separation of timescales). The steady state solutions
    of Eqs. (5-6) become

                                                        f (⃗x, t)
                                             ρ (⃗x, t) =           → 0,                                                           (11)
                                                        g (⃗x, t)
                                                                           
                                                        1      f (⃗x, t)
                                            ν (⃗x, t) =      c           − a → νc ,                                               (12)
                                                        b      g (⃗x, t)

    respectively. Self-organization properties are reflected by the following processes: if the brain is in the
    absorbing phase because neural dynamics vanishes, i.e, ρ (⃗x, t) → 0, Eq. (6) becomes
     ∂
     ∂t
        ν (⃗x, t) = f (⃗x, t) to shift the brain towards the active phase; if the brain is in the active phase, Eq. (6)
            ∂
    becomes ∂t ν (⃗x, t) ≃ −g (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x, t) to reduce neural dynamics since f (⃗x, t) ≪ g (⃗x, t). These
    feedback-control loops drive the brain to the critical point. One may be curious about why energy
    conservation, i.e., g (⃗x, t) → 0, is necessary for SOC since the above derivations seem to be independent
    of g (⃗x, t) → 0. Later we show that the absence of g (⃗x, t) → 0 in Eq. (14) makes the active phase no
    longer exist. In other words, the non-conserved energy implies a kind of continuous phase transition that

                                                               –20–
                                                       == D R A F T         ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    does not belong to conserved directed percolation or directed percolation when the infinite separation of
    timescales is satisfied. Therefore, energy conservation is necessary for SOC.


    Langevin formulation of self-organized quasi-criticality         As for SOqC, non-zero bulk dissipation breaks the
    conservation law to generate non-Markovian components in neural dynamics Bonachela and Munoz
    (2009); Buendı́a, Di Santo, et al. (2020). In the ideal cases where the drive terms (e.g., stimulus inputs) of
    a sufficiently large neural dynamics system occur at an arbitrarily slow timescale (i.e., only occur in the
    interval between neural avalanches), the brain exhibits pure dynamical percolation behaviours Buendı́a,
    Di Santo, et al. (2020). To understand this property, let us consider a variant of Eqs. (5-6) where the
    dissipation term g (⃗x, t) is non-negligible

                                      ∂
                                         ρ (⃗x, t) = (a + bν (⃗x, t)) ρ (⃗x, t) − cρ2 (⃗x, t) ,                                   (13)
                                      ∂t
                                      ∂
                                         ν (⃗x, t) = −g (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x, t) .                                                       (14)
                                      ∂t

    By integrating Eq. (14) and plugging the integral into Eq. (13), we can derive
                                                                                            Z t
                   ∂
                      ρ (⃗x, t) = (a + bν (⃗x, 0)) ρ (⃗x, t) − cρ2 (⃗x, t) − bρ (⃗x, t)           g (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x, τ ) dτ,        (15)
                   ∂t                                                                        0

                                      Rt
    The non-Markovian term −bρ (⃗x, t) 0 g (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x, τ ) dτ in Eq. (15) makes the regions already visited by
    neural dynamics become more unlikely to be activated Bonachela and Munoz (2009); Buendı́a, Di Santo,
    et al. (2020). Therefore, the pure self-sustained active phase vanishes and is replaced by a spreading
    phase, where local perturbations can transiently propagate across the whole system without reaching a
    self-sustained state, and a non-spreading phase, where local perturbations can never span the entire
    system Bonachela and Munoz (2009); Buendı́a, Di Santo, et al. (2020). The phase transition and
    corresponding critical point νd > νc between spreading and non-spreading phases belong to the
    universality class of dynamical percolation rather than conserved directed percolation Bonachela and
    Munoz (2009); Buendı́a, Di Santo, et al. (2020). The initial neural dynamics can be created by random
    shifts at moment 0 Bonachela and Munoz (2009); Buendı́a, Di Santo, et al. (2020)


                                              ρ (⃗x∗ , 0) → ϵ,                                                                    (16)

                                              ν (⃗x∗ , 0) → ν (⃗x∗ , 0) + h (⃗x∗ , 0) ,                                           (17)


                                                                 –21–
                                                       == D R A F T         ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    where ⃗x∗ is a randomly selected coordinate, and function h (·, ·) is a driving function of energy at
    moment 0. Every time a neural avalanche occurs after random shifts, the strong dissipation term g (⃗x, t)
    pushes the brain towards the sub-critical phase. Consequently, the brain can not exactly self-organize to
    the perfect criticality. Instead, the brain just hovers around the critical point νd to form a quasi-critical
    region, exhibiting finite fluctuations to the both sides of νd . In the more realistic cases where the drive
    terms do not necessarily occur at an arbitrarily slow timescale (i.e., can occur at an arbitrary moment),
    however, neural dynamics may be phenomenology controlled by conserved directed percolation
    transitions and hover around the critical point. Let us add a drive term in Eq. (14)

                                           ∂
                                              ν (⃗x, t) = f (⃗x, t) − g (⃗x, t) ρ (⃗x, t) .                                       (18)
                                           ∂t

    Then Eq. (15) becomes
                                                                                 Z t
         ∂
            ρ (⃗x, t) = (a + bν (⃗x, 0)) ρ (⃗x, t) − cρ2 (⃗x, t) − bρ (⃗x, t)          (f (⃗x, τ ) − g (⃗x, τ ) ρ (⃗x, τ )) dτ,   (19)
         ∂t                                                                       0


    If we can ideally fine tune the drive term f (⃗x, t) to ensure that fg(⃗
                                                                          (⃗
                                                                           x,t)
                                                                           x,t)
                                                                                → r ∈ (0, ∞), the steady state
    solutions of Eqs. (18-19) are

                                    f (⃗x, t)
                         ρ (⃗x, t) =           → r,                                                                               (20)
                                    g (⃗x, t)
                                                        
                                    1      f (⃗x, t)              1
                        ν (⃗x, 0) =      c           − a → (cr − a) ,                                                             (21)
                                    b      g (⃗x, t)              b
                                                  Z t
                                                                                               1
                        ν (⃗x, t) = ν (⃗x, 0) +       (f (⃗x, τ ) − g (⃗x, τ ) ρ (⃗x, τ )) dτ → (cr − a) .                        (22)
                                                   0                                           b

    Eqs. (20-22) correspond to a steady state of the brain with ρ (⃗x, t) → r and conserved energy, which is
    similar to SOC. Therefore, the brain may self-organize to a quasi-critical region around νc , the critical
    point of SOC. Reaching the critical point requires ideal fine tuning. These emerged
    conserved-directed-percolation behaviours enable scientists to recognize SOqC in a similar manner of
    SOC in practice (i.e., when stimulus inputs can occur at any moment) Bonachela and Munoz (2009);
    Buendı́a, Di Santo, et al. (2020).


    Summary of theoretical relations       Taken together, neuroscientists can approximately verify the existence
    of brain criticality in the space of absorbing and active phases with specific tools coming from directed
    percolation theory. This is because OC, qC, SOC, and SOqC exhibit or approximately exhibit directed

                                                                –22–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    percolation behaviours under certain conditions. The verification may be inaccurate since the
    approximation holds conditionally. As for the brain criticality between asynchronous and synchronous
    phases, however, the universality class properties become rather elusive because an analytic and complete
    theory of synchronous phase transitions in the brain remains absent yet (see Buendı́a, Villegas, Burioni,
    and Munoz (2021); Di Santo et al. (2018) for early attempts). Although some behaviours of absorbing
    phase transitions can be observed in synchronous phase transitions (e.g., see Buendı́a et al. (2021);
    Di Santo et al. (2018); Fontenele et al. (2019); Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021)), there also exist numerous
    differences between them (e.g., see Buendı́a et al. (2021); Fontenele et al. (2019); Girardi-Schappo et al.
    (2021)). As suggested by Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019), it remains elusive if directed percolation
    properties are applicable, at least conditionally applicable, to analyzing synchronous phase transitions.
    More explorations are necessary in the future.


    There are numerous properties of brain criticality predicted by directed percolation theory, among which,
    neural avalanche exponents (the power-law exponents of lifetime and size distributions), scaling relation,
    universal collapse shape, and slow decay of auto-correlation are applicable in both analytic derivations
    and statistical estimations from empirical data. These properties are our main focuses. For convenience,
    we summarize important glossaries and symbol conventions before we discuss theoretical details (Table
    2).

    Neural avalanche exponents
    As we have mentioned above, neural avalanches are expected to exhibit power-law properties in their
    lifetime and size distributions when the brain is at the critical point Hinrichsen (2000); Larremore et al.
    (2012); Lübeck (2004). Therefore, it is pivotal to confirm the detailed values of neural avalanche
    exponents. To analytically derive these exponents, one can consider critical branching process di Santo,
    Villegas, Burioni, and Muñoz (2017); Garcı́a-Pelayo, Salazar, and Schieve (1993); Gros (2010); Harris
    and Edward (1963); Otter (1949), neural field theory Robinson (2021), mean-field Abelian sandpile
    models Janowsky and Laberge (1993); D. S. Lee, Goh, Kahng, and Kim (2004), and avalanches in
    networks Larremore et al. (2012). The key idea to derive neural avalanche exponents shared by these
    existing theories is to confirm the explicit forms of PT (t) and PS (s), the probability distributions of the
    lifetime and size of neural avalanches, under ideal conditions (e.g., when the maximum lifetime and size
    are unlimited and can be infinitely large). In real cases where lifetime and size are restricted because the

                                                               –23–
                                                                    == D R A F T            ==
                     Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE                  /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun



    Table 2.    Glossaries and symbol conventions. Please note that Table 2 mainly contains important glossaries with fixed symbol definitions. There are many

    symbols uncovered by Table 2 since they are only used for mathematical derivations.


           Variable                                                                 Meaning

                 T                                                  The lifetime of the neural avalanche

                 S                                                      The size of the neural avalanche

                 A                                                      The area of the neural avalanche

            ⟨S (T )⟩                                    The averaged size of neural avalanches with lifetime T

          ⟨S (t | T )⟩      The averaged time-dependent avalanche size at moment t during neural avalanches with the lifetime T

               PT (t)                                   The probability distribution of neural avalanche lifetime

               PS (s)                                     The probability distribution of neural avalanche size

                 α                        Power-law exponent of the neural avalanche lifetime distribution PT (t) ∝ t−α

                 β                          Power-law exponent of the neural avalanche size distribution PS (s) ∝ s−β

                 γ                                       Power exponent of the neural avalanche area A ∝ T γ

               H (·)                                                       Universal scaling function

           Cov (·, ·)                                                      Auto-correlation function

                 χ                                               Power-law decay rate of auto-correlation

                 ξ                                              Exponential decay rate of auto-correlation




    brain is a finite system, slight deviations from idea values may be observed but theoretical derivations of
    neural avalanche exponents principally hold.




    To present accessible expositions, we consider a critical branching process in Eqs. (23-34) to describe
    related backgrounds. More importantly, we present a novel and simple idea to calculate target exponents
    in the context of neuroscience in Box 1. Abstractly, one can define P (n, t) as the probability for an
    active neuron at moment t to activate n post-synaptic neurons subsequently and define Z (n, t) as the

                                                                              –24–
                                                          == D R A F T           ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE              /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    probability of finding n active neurons at moment t. Meanwhile, one denote

                                                                    ∞
                                                                    X
                                                  F (x, t) =              P (n, t) xn ,                                                (23)
                                                                    n=0
                                                                    X∞
                                                      G (x, t) =           Z (n, t) xn                                                 (24)
                                                                     n=0


    as the corresponding generating functions Fristedt and Gray (2013); Rao and Swift (2006). Then, one can
    readily see the recursion relation

                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                                        G (x, t) =            Z (n, t − δt) F (x, t − δt)n ,                                           (25)
                                                        n=0

                                                  = G (F (x, t − δt) , t − δt) ,                                                       (26)


    where δt denotes the minimum time step. Eq. (26) implies that branching processes are Markovian.
    Similarly, one can measure the expectations

                                                              ∂
                                                      µ (t) =    F (x, t)     ,                                                        (27)
                                                              ∂x          x=1
                                                              ∂
                                                      ϕ (t) =    G (x, t)                                                              (28)
                                                              ∂x          x=1



    to derive another recursion relation

                                               ∂                   ∂
                                     ϕ (t) =      F (x, t − 1)        G (x, t − 1)     ,                                               (29)
                                               ∂x              x=1 ∂x              x=1

                                           = ϕ (t − δ) µ (t − δ) ,                                                                     (30)
                                               t−δ
                                               Y
                                           =          µ (τ ) .                                                                         (31)
                                               τ =0


    Note that Eq. (31) is derived from the fact that ϕ (0) = 1 (one neuron is activated at moment 0 to trigger
    neural avalanches). Please see Marković and Gros (2014) for more explanations of Eqs. (25-31).
    Assuming that ϕ (t) scales as exp (λt) for large t, we know that ϕ (t) converges to 0 given a negative
    Lyapunov exponent λ (the branching process is sub-critical di Santo et al. (2017); Garcı́a-Pelayo et al.
    (1993); Gros (2010); Harris and Edward (1963); Otter (1949)) and diverges with a positive Lyapunov
    exponent λ (the branching process is super-critical di Santo et al. (2017); Garcı́a-Pelayo et al. (1993);

                                                                    –25–
                                                                  == D R A F T           ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE                     /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




     Gros (2010); Harris and Edward (1963); Otter (1949)). Here λ can be defined according to Eq. (32)
                                                              t−δ
                                              1               1X
                                λ = lim ln      ϕ (t) = lim          ln (µ (τ )) .                     (32)
                                     t→∞      t           t→∞ t
                                                                τ =0

     If the branching process is homogeneous, namely P (n, t) = P (n), Z (n, t) = Z (n), µ (τ ) = µ, and
     ϕ (τ ) = ϕ for every moment τ , then µ = 1 is the condition for the branching process to be critical. To
                                                                                                    P
     relate these results with neural avalanches, one only need to consider the avalanche size S = t z (t),
     where z (t) ∼ Z denotes the number of active neurons at moment t, and the avalanche life time
     T = min{t | z (t) > 0 and z (t + δt) = 0}. It has been analytically proved that in terms of fixed
     environments and a Poisson generating function F one can derive Otter (1949)

                                                     PS (s) ∼ s−3/2 µs−1 exp [s (1 − µ)] ,                                                           (33)

                                                     PT (t) ∼ t−2 µt−1 exp [t (1 − µ)] .                                                             (34)

     In the case with µ = 1, one can obtain PS (s) ∼ s−3/2 and PT (t) ∼ t−2 , the power-law distributions of
     neural avalanche size and neural avalanche life time di Santo et al. (2017); Garcı́a-Pelayo et al. (1993);
     Gros (2010); Harris and Edward (1963); Janowsky and Laberge (1993); Jung, Le, Lee, and Lee (2020);
     Larremore et al. (2012); D. S. Lee et al. (2004); Lombardi, Herrmann, and de Arcangelis (2017); Otter
     (1949); Robinson (2021), from Eqs. (33-34).

     The derivations of avalanche exponents α = 2 and β = 32 are non-trivial. However, few neuroscience
     studies elaborate on these details, impeding researchers from understanding the theoretical foundations of
     brain criticality in the brain. The importance of these derivations is beyond the detailed values of
     avalanche exponents since they reveal the fundamental properties of neural dynamics Cocchi et al.
     (2017); di Santo et al. (2017); Girardi-Schappo (2021). In Box 1, we sketch an original idea to derive
     these avalanche exponents in the terminology of neuroscience. In Fig. 3A, we present graphical
     illustrations of our idea in Box 1.



       Box 1. Derivations of neural avalanche exponents

       Consider a time-continuous neural dynamics process, where an active neuron implies three possibilities: becoming absorbed with


       probability ς, activating another neuron with probability η, or remaining effect-free with probability 1 − (ς + η). In critical states, we have




                                                                            –26–
                                                                   == D R A F T                 ==
                 Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE                     /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




       ς = η Garcı́a-Pelayo et al. (1993). We define An (t) as the probability for n active neurons to exist at t∗ + t given that 1 active neuron


       exists at t∗ . Assuming the independence of neuron activation, we have

                                                                         X
                                                        An (t) =                    An1 (t) . . . Ank (t) .                                        (35)
                                                                   n1 +...+nk =n


       If An (t), n ∈ N+ admits a Maclaurin expansion An (t) = an t + o t2 (when n ̸= 1) or An (t) = an t + 1 + o t2 (when n = 1) where
                                                                                                                   


       an = dAn (0) /dt, we can readily derive a0 = a2 = ς and a1 = −2ς Garcı́a-Pelayo et al. (1993). Meanwhile, we can know

                                                                                     ∞
                                                                                     X
                                                        An (t + dt) − An (t) =             ak An−k (t) dt.                                         (36)
                                                                                     k=0


       Eqs. (15-16) readily lead to
                                                                                       
                                                     ∞      ∞                 k                 ∞
                                      ∂             X      X         X       Y                 X
                                         W (x, t) =     ak                      Ani (t) xn =     ak W (x, t)k ,                                  (37)
                                      ∂t            k=0    n=0 n +...+n =n−k i=1               k=0
                                                                   1         k

                          P∞               n , x ∈ [0, 1] denotes the generating function. Applying a trick introduced in Garcı́a-Pelayo et al. (1993),
       where W (x, t) =     n=0 An (t) x


                         ∂
       we define H (x) = ∂t                                    ∂
                            W (x, 0), which naturally leads to ∂t W (x, t) = H (W (x, t)). Meanwhile, H (x) = ς (1 − x)2 can be derived


       based on a0 , a1 , and a2 Garcı́a-Pelayo et al. (1993). Taken together, we have


                                                              ∂
                                                                 W (x, t) = ς (1 − W (x, t))2 .                                                    (38)
                                                              ∂t


       Note that the initial condition is W (x, 0) = x since one neuron is activated at t∗ . Solving Eq. (38), we derive that


                                                                                    ς (1 − x) t
                                                                 W (x, t) =                      .                                                 (39)
                                                                                 ς (1 − x) t + 1

                                               ςt
       Therefore, we have A0 (t) = W (0, t) = ςt+1 , supporting a calculation of lifetime distribution PT (t)


                                                                                    d
                                                           lim PT (t) = lim             W (0, t) ∼ t−2 .                                           (40)
                                                           t→∞               t→∞ dt



       Following Garcı́a-Pelayo et al. (1993); Harris and Edward (1963); Otter (1949), one can similarily calculate


                                                                                            3
                                                                       lim PS (s) ∼ s− 2 .                                                         (41)
                                                                       s→∞




    There are three important things to remind. First, the lifetime exponent α = 2 and size exponent β = 32
    can only be treated as ideal exponents under mean field assumptions of directed percolation. There are
    numerous factors, such as granularity, network topology, and neural dynamics variability, can be
    considered in derivations to affect the detailed values of avalanche exponents Bonachela and Munoz

                                                                                 –27–
                                                      == D R A F T            ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    (2009); Girardi-Schappo (2021). In Table 3, we summarize the possible intervals of α and β in empirical
    neural data. Second, α and β alone are not sufficient to verify the existence of brain criticality. Even
    when the actual values of α and β in empirical data are exactly equal to theoretical predictions, they may
    still not satisfy the scaling relation and universal collapse. Meanwhile, as we shall discuss later,
    estimating α and β in practice is statistically error-pone. Third, one can not confirm or disprove a detail
    type of brain criticality based on α and β unless additional information is provided. Although four types
    of brain criticality exhibit (e.g., OC) or approximatively exhibit (e.g., qC, SOC, and SOqC) directed
    percolation behaviours under certain conditions, these preconditions are difficult to verify in practice.

    Scaling relation
    In the previous section, we discuss how the neural avalanche lifetime and size distributions exhibit
    power-law properties when the brain is at the critical point Hinrichsen (2000); Larremore et al. (2012);
    Lübeck (2004). Apart from lifetime T and size S, there are several other quantities that characterize
    neural avalanches, such as area A (number of distinct active neurons, measured as A ≃ ⟨S (T )⟩ where
    the expectation ⟨·⟩ is averaged across all neural avalanches with the same lifetime T ) and radius exponent
    R (radius of gyration) Lübeck (2004); Lübeck and Heger (2003). In general, the corresponding
    probability distributions of these four quantities decay algebraically

                                                           PX (x) ∝ x−λX ,                                                          (42)

    where random variable X ∈ {S, T, A, R} can be an arbitrary quantity to characterize neural avalanches.
    The avalanche exponent λX is defined according to the selected meaning of X (e.g., λT = 2 and λT = 23
    under mean filed assumptions). Assuming that variables {S, T, A, R} scale as a power of each other

                                          X ′ ∝ X ψX ′ X , ∀X, X ′ ∈ {S, T, A, R},                                                  (43)

    we can derive the scaling relation from Eqs. (42-43)

                                                                    λX − 1
                                                       ψX ′ X =              .                                                      (44)
                                                                    λX ′ − 1

    If we let X ′ = A and X = T , we can specify Eq. (44) as

                                                                   α−1
                                                             γ=        ,                                                            (45)
                                                                   β−1


                                                                 –28–
                                                                      == D R A F T              ==
                  Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE                        /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    where PT (t) ∝ t−α , PS (s) ∝ s−β , and A ∝ T γ . Eq. (45) leads to γ = 2 in the mean field theory of
    directed percolation. In Table 3, one can see the possible interval of γ in empirical neural data. Eq. (45)
    is widely used as a criterion to verify if the brain is at the critical point in neuroscience studies (e.g.,
    Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019); Fontenele et al. (2019); N. Friedman et al. (2012); Ponce-Alvarez et al.
    (2018)). Once the scaling relation is confirmed among observed neural avalanche exponents, it indicates
    key features of the universality class (please note that α, β, and γ should be derived independently). For
    neuroscientists, the importance of Eq. (45) lies in that it provides extra verification of the validity of
    estimated neural avalanche exponents. This verification is necessary given that neural avalanche
    exponent estimation is frequently inaccurate Fontenele et al. (2019). In Fig. 3B, we illustrate the scaling
    relation in Eq. (45) under mean field assumptions.

    In Lübeck (2004), one can further learn about how brain criticality is mapped to an directed percolation
    transition characterized by ordinary critical exponents. Meanwhile, one can see how to connect these
    neural avalanche exponents with second order phase transition exponents Lübeck and Heger (2003).

    Universal collapse shape



    Table 3. Neural avalanche exponents with scaling relation in empirical data. The data is acquired from Girardi-Schappo (2021), where 45 experimental

    observations of neuronal avalanches reported by 30 studies are summarized. These observations can be classified according to the recording techniques of

    neural avalanches. Detailed data classification criteria (e.g., details of spike sorting and thresholding) can be seen in Girardi-Schappo (2021). We only include

    the data where α, β, and γ are all recorded and satisfy the scaling relation in Eq. (45). For LFP recordings filtered by spike sorting, included observations

    are reported by Carvalho et al. (2021); Fontenele et al. (2019); Fosque et al. (2021); Ma et al. (2019); Mariani et al. (2021); Senzai et al. (2019). For LFP

    recordings with thresholding, included observations come from Mariani et al. (2021); Shew et al. (2015). For Ca and voltage imaging, observations are provided

    by Ponce-Alvarez et al. (2018); Yaghoubi et al. (2018). Although numerous studies report neural avalanches in whole-brain imaging (e.g., MEG, M/EEG, and

    invasive ECoG), these studies either do not report three exponents together Palva et al. (2013); Shriki et al. (2013); Zhigalov et al. (2015) or have not observed

    the scaling relation in Eq. (45) Varley et al. (2020). One can see Girardi-Schappo (2021) for a summary of these results.


      Data type                                             Observed interval of α           Observed interval of β           Observed interval of γ

      LFP recordings filtered by spike sorting              α ∈ [1.35, 2.67]                 β ∈ [1.3, 2.5]                   γ ∈ [1.16, 1.48]

      LFP recordings with thresholding                      α ∈ [1.82, 2.84]                 β ∈ [1.57, 2.59]                 γ ∈ [1.12, 1.39]

      Ca and voltage imaging                                α ∈ [2.15, 3.5]                  β ∈ [1.5, 2.3]                   γ ∈ [1.75, 2.5]



                                                                                 –29–
                                                                              == D R A F T              ==
                  Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE                               /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Figure 3.    Conceptual illustrations of the neural avalanche properties predicted by analytic theories of brain criticality. A, Illustrations of the framework to

    derive neural avalanche exponents in Box 3. B, Illustrations of the scaling relation satisfied by neural avalanches under mean field assumptions. C, Illustrations

    of the universal collapse shape of neural avalanches. The un-scaled plot of t vs. ⟨S (t | T )⟩ (upper left) and the scaled plot ⟨S (t | T )⟩T 1−γ vs. Tt (upper

    right) are shown for comparison. Here terms T1 and T 1−γ respectively serve as scale factors on x-axis and y-axis to create a universal collapse shape.

    Meanwhile, the symmetric collapse shape in Eq. (51) (bottom left) and the asymmetric collapse shape controlled by skewness c in Eq. (52) (bottom right)

    are also presented. D, Auto-correlations and their decays in critical (left) and non-critical (right) cases are shown. Auto-correlations are calculated after a

    ti ∈ [0, T ) is randomly selected as a reference (upper left and right). Meanwhile, the auto-correlation decays measured on tj ∈ [ti , T ] is fitted to derive the

                                                   tj −ti                                        tj −ti
                                                           
    coefficients χ (x-axis corresponds to ln          T
                                                                ) and ξ (x-axis corresponds to      T
                                                                                                        ) in Eq. (53) and Eq. (55) (bottom left and right). One can see that

    auto-correlations in the critical case have slower decays (smaller χ and ξ) than those in the non-critical case.




                                                                                         –30–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Universal collapse with an implicit scaling function        Apart from the scaling relation discussed above, the
    average temporal shape of bursts, a fundamental signature of avalanches Baldassarri, Colaiori, and
    Castellano (2003); Laurson et al. (2013); Papanikolaou et al. (2011), can also be used to verify the
    existence of brain criticality in a more precise manner. This approach has been previously applied on
    diverse physical systems, such as plastically deforming crystals Laurson and Alava (2006) and
    Barkhausen noise Mehta, Mills, Dahmen, and Sethna (2002); Papanikolaou et al. (2011), and is recently
    introduced into neuroscience Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019); Fontenele et al. (2019); N. Friedman et al.
    (2012); Pausch, Garcia-Millan, and Pruessner (2020); Ponce-Alvarez et al. (2018). To understand this
    approach, let us step back to the power relation in Eq. (43) and specify that X ′ = A and X = T . These
    settings naturally lead to
                                                             Z T
                                          A ≃ ⟨S (T )⟩ ≡           ⟨S (t | T )⟩dt ∝ T γ ,                                         (46)
                                                               0

    where ⟨S (t | T )⟩ measures the averaged time-dependent avalanche size during an avalanche and the
    expectation ⟨·⟩ is averaged across all neural avalanches with the same lifetime T . Eq. (46) can be readily
    reformulated as

                                                      ⟨S (t | T )⟩ ∝ T γ−1 .                                                      (47)

    The general form of Eq. (47) is usually given by Baldassarri et al. (2003); Laurson et al. (2013);
    Papanikolaou et al. (2011)
                                                                             
                                                                    γ−1      t
                                                 ⟨S (t | T )⟩ = T         H     ,                                                 (48)
                                                                             T

    where H (·) denotes a universal scaling function. When the brain is at the critical point, all data of
    ⟨S (t | T )⟩T 1−γ is expected to collapse onto H (·) with reasonable errors Baldassarri et al. (2003);
    Laurson et al. (2013); Papanikolaou et al. (2011). Here the terminology “collapse onto” means that all
    data generally exhibits a similar pattern in a plot of ⟨S (t | T )⟩T 1−γ vs. Tt (e.g., all data follows function
    H (·)). Meanwhile, scaling function H (·) is expected to be a parabolic function Baldassarri et al. (2003);
    Laurson et al. (2013); Papanikolaou et al. (2011). By testing these properties, neuroscientists can verify
    whether the brain is at criticality (e.g., Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019); Fontenele et al. (2019);
    N. Friedman et al. (2012); Ponce-Alvarez et al. (2018)). In Fig. 3C, we graphically illustrate these
    properties.

                                                               –31–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    Universal collapse with an explicit scaling function        Under specific conditions, researchers can further
    consider an explicit form of scaling function H (·) Laurson et al. (2013). Assuming that the early-time
    growth of neural avalanches averagely follows a power-law of time, one can derive that ⟨S (t | T )⟩ ∝ tκ
    for certain Tt ≤ ε ≪ 1. Meanwhile, one knows that ⟨S (εT | T )⟩ ∝ T γ−1 should hold according to Eq.
    (28). To ensure these two properties, one needs to have ⟨S (εT | T )⟩ ∝ (εT )κ ∝ T γ−1 , which readily
    leads to κ = γ − 1. Based on these derivations, one can know


                                                 ⟨S (t | T )⟩ ∝ tγ−1 , t ≪ T.                                                      (49)


    To find an explicit form of H (·) that satisfies Eqs. (48-49), one can consider a possible answer Laurson
    et al. (2013)
                                                         γ−1
                                                  t   t    t
                                               H    =   1−         ,                                                               (50)
                                                  T   T    T

                                                                                         γ−1                     γ−1
    which can be analytically derived by multiplying Eq. (49) by 1 − Tt                         . Here 1 − Tt             is a term to
    characterize the deceleration at the ends of neural avalanches Laurson et al. (2013). Because γ = 2 is
    expected for critical neural avalanches under mean field assumptions, Eq. (48) and Eq. (50) imply that
                                                                        
                                                                       t
                                                  ⟨S (t | T )⟩ ∝ t 1 −     .                                                       (51)
                                                                       T

    This result is consistent with the prediction by the ABBM model in the limit of vanishing drive rate and
    demagnetizing factor N. Friedman et al. (2012); Laurson et al. (2013).


    A potential limitation of Eq. (51) in applications lies in its internal symmetry property Laurson et al.
    (2013). Although avalanches under mean-field frameworks have a symmetric average shape N. Friedman
    et al. (2012), it does not mean that symmetry generally holds in real complex systems Laurson et al.
    (2013). Applying Eq. (48) on neural data, researchers may observe a nonstandard parabolic function
    H (·) with specific skewness. This does not necessarily mean that neural dynamics is not at criticality.
    When neural avalanches are time-irreversible (this is generally true in the brain since the detailed balance
    of neural dynamics is frequently broken Lynn et al. (2021)), one can consider small temporal asymmetry
    in the collapse shape Laurson et al. (2013). To characterize potential asymmetry, one can add a correction

                                                               –32–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    term controlled by skewness degree c into Eq. (51)
                                                                   
                                                       t         t   1
                                ⟨S (t | T )⟩ ∝ t 1 −       1−c     −      .                                                       (52)
                                                       T         T   2

    If c = 0, then Eq. (52) reduces to Eq. (51). Otherwise, neural avalanches can have a temporally
    asymmetric collapse shape with a positive (c > 0) or negative (c < 0) skewness Laurson et al. (2013). We
    suggest that Eq. (52) may be more applicable to real data of neural dynamics. In Fig. 3C, we show
    examples of Eqs. (51-52).

    Slow decay of auto-correlation
    In applications, researchers can also consider a more practical verification of the potential brain criticality.
    When the brain is at the critical point, a slow decay of auto-correlation is expected to occur in neural
    avalanches, corresponding to long-range correlations Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019); Erdos, Kruger, and
    Renfrew (2018); Schaworonkow, Blythe, Kegeles, Curio, and Nikulin (2015); Smit et al. (2011). This
    slow decay property is initially derived from the power-law decay of auto-correlation, which can be
    analytically derived as a part of the scaling relation if ordinary critical exponents of directed percolation
    transition are considered (see Girardi-Schappo (2021) for details). The power-law decay is expressed as
                                                                                  
                                 Cov (S (ti | T ) , S (tj | T ))             tj − ti
                            ln                                     = −χ ln             + r,             (53)
                                 Cov (S (ti | T ) , S (ti | T ))                T

    where ti ∈ [0, T ) is used as a reference and tj ∈ [ti , T ] traverses the entire interval Schaworonkow et al.
    (2015); Smit et al. (2011). According to the Wiener–Khinchin theorem, coefficient χ is related to S (f ),
    the power spectrum of neural avalanches (notion f denotes frequency) Bak et al. (1987); Girardi-Schappo
    (2021); Linkenkaer-Hansen, Nikouline, Palva, and Ilmoniemi (2001). One may expect S (f ) ∼ f −υ at
    the critical point, where χ = 1 − υ Bak et al. (1987); Girardi-Schappo (2021); Linkenkaer-Hansen et al.
    (2001). The power-law decay of auto-correlation in Eq. (53) breaks down when υ = 1, leading to
    infinitely long temporal correlations. Therefore, χ ∈ [0, ∞) in Eq. (53) is expected to be sufficiently
    small. Certainly, the actual value of χ may not be perfectly zero in empirical data. For instance,
    χ ∈ [0.58 ± 0.23, 0.73 ± 0.31] and χ ∈ [0.52 ± 0.35, 0.81 ± 0.32] are observed in spontaneous alpha
    oscillations in MEG and EEG data, respectively Linkenkaer-Hansen et al. (2001).

    Apart from verifying power-law decay directly, one can also consider the exponential decay, which is
    active in neuroscience as well Miller and Wang (2006); Pausch et al. (2020); Wilting and Priesemann

                                                               –33–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    (2019). The exponential decay can described by

                            ∂
                               Cov (S (ti | T ) , S (tj | T )) = −ξ Cov (S (ti | T ) , S (tj | T )) .                             (54)
                            ∂t

    Eq. (54) directly leads to
                                                                                  
                                    Cov (S (ti | T ) , S (tj | T ))          tj − ti
                                 ln                                   = −ξ             + r.                                       (55)
                                    Cov (S (ti | T ) , S (ti | T ))             T

    The exponential decay can be seen in the dynamics with short-term correlations (i.e., correlations have a
    characteristic time scale). Mathematically, the exponential decay can be related to power-law decay in a
                          R∞
    form of x−y = Γ (y) 0 z y−1 exp (−xz) dz, where Γ (·) denotes the Gamma function. When ξ ∈ [0, ∞)
    is sufficiently small, Eq. (55) can be treated as a looser criterion that approximately verifies the slow
    decay of auto-correlation and may be more applicable to non-standard brain criticality (e.g., qC and
    SOqC) Wilting and Priesemann (2019). Despite of its practicality, this looser criterion should be used
    with cautions since it is not analytically derived from criticality theories.


    In Fig. 3D, we illustrate examples of auto-correlation slow decay in critical cases and compare them with
    non-critical cases. Compared with other properties previously discussed, a slow auto-correlation decay
    can be readily verified by conventional data fitting. However, we need to note that one should not confirm
    or reject the possibility of brain criticality only based on the decay characteristic of auto-correlation in
    Eqs. (53-55). This is because Eqs. (53-55) only serve as the approximate descriptions of long-range
    correlations at criticality. The strict criterion χ, ξ → 0 is rarely seen in empirical data while the
    determination of whether χ and ξ are sufficiently small in the looser criterion is relatively subjective.


    In summary, we have reviewed the physical foundations of identifying and characterizing criticality in the
    brain. Based on these analytic derivations, we attempt to present systematic explanations of what is brain
    criticality and how to identify potential criticality in neural dynamics. Nevertheless, physical theories
    alone are not sufficient to support neuroscience studies because the implementation of these theories on
    empirical data is even more challenging than the theories themselves. To overcome these challenges, one
    needs to learn about statistic techniques to computationally estimate brain criticality from empirical data.


    BRAIN CRITICALITY: STATISTIC TECHNIQUES

                                                               –34–
                                                      == D R A F T              ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    While most properties of neural avalanches analytically predicted by the physical theories of brain
    criticality can be estimated by conventional statistic techniques, there exist several properties that
    frequently imply serious validity issues and deserve special attention. Below, we discuss them in detail.

    Estimating neural avalanche exponents
    Perhaps the estimation of neural avalanche exponents from empirical data is the most error-prone step in
    brain criticality analysis. The least-square approach is abused in fitting power-law data and frequently
    derives highly inaccurate results Clauset, Shalizi, and Newman (2009); Virkar and Clauset (2014). To
    derive neural avalanche exponents α and β in Eq. (25) with reasonable errors, one need to consider the
    maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) approach and corresponding statistic tests (see MLE on
    un-binned data Clauset et al. (2009) and binned data Virkar and Clauset (2014)). Taking the avalanche
    size distribution as an instance, the estimator βb of distribution exponent β is expected to maximize the
    log-likelihood function
                                                                          n
                                                                          X
                                                             ′
                                    L (β) = −n ln [ζ (β, s )] − β               ln (si ) ,                                        (56)
                                                                          i=1
                                                                   k
                                                                   X                                  
                                    L (β) = n (β − 1) ln b +  ′
                                                                          hi ln          b1−β
                                                                                          i
                                                                                                 1−β
                                                                                              − bi+1       .                      (57)
                                                                    i=1

    Here Eq. (56) and Eq. (57) denote the log-likelihood functions on un-binned and binned data,
    respectively. Function ζ (·, ·) is the generalized zeta function Bauke (2007); Clauset et al. (2009). Notion
    s denotes avalanche size samples in Eq. (33) and Eq. (41) Clauset et al. (2009). Notion b denotes bin
    boundaries defined on these samples and h counts the number of samples within each bin Virkar and
    Clauset (2014). Notions s′ and b′ are the lower cutoffs of un-binned and binned power-law distributions
    Clauset et al. (2009); Virkar and Clauset (2014). They are necessary because few empirical data exhibits
    power-law properties on the entire distribution Clauset et al. (2009). Notions n and k measure the
    numbers of samples and bins above cutoffs, respectively Clauset et al. (2009); Virkar and Clauset (2014).
    To estimate βb precisely, researchers are suggested to follow several indispensable steps Clauset et al.
    (2009); Virkar and Clauset (2014): (1) for each potential choice of s′ or b′ , estimate the power-law model
    on the distribution tail above the cutoff. Compute the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) goodness-of-fit
    statistic between the cumulative probability distributions of power-law model and empirical data. Find
    the ideal choice of s′ or b′ that minimizes KS statistic; (2) derive the corresponding estimator βb and KS
    statistic based on the chosen cutoff; (3) use the semi-parametric bootstrap to generate numerous synthetic

                                                                  –35–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    data distributions that follow the estimated power-law model above the cutoff but follow the empirical
    data distribution below the cutoff. Estimate new power-law models on these synthetic data distributions
    and measure the goodness-of-fit by KS statistic. Define a p-value, the fraction of these KS statistics in
    step (3) that are no less than the KS statistic in step (2). Rule out the estimated power-law model in steps
    (1-2) if p < 0.1 (conservative criterion). Apart from these necessary steps, one can further consider
    Vuong’s likelihood ratio test for alternative distribution checking Clauset et al. (2009); Virkar and Clauset
    (2014); Vuong (1989) and information loss measurement of binning approach Virkar and Clauset (2014).
    During the above process, we measure the goodness-of-fit by KS statistic instead of the well-known χ2
    statistic because the latter has less statistic power Bauke (2007); Clauset et al. (2009); Virkar and Clauset
    (2014). Meanwhile, KS statistic is measured on cumulative probability distributions rather than
    probability distributions to control the effects of extreme values in empirical data Clauset et al. (2009);
    Virkar and Clauset (2014). Except for the above approach Clauset et al. (2009); Virkar and Clauset
    (2014), one can also consider the BIC method (for un-binned data) Schwarz (1978) and the RT method
    (for binned data) Reiss and Thomas (2007) for comparisons. In practice, the approaches proposed by
    Clauset et al. are more robust Clauset et al. (2009); Virkar and Clauset (2014) and have attracted
    numerous follow-up studies for improvements (e.g., Deluca and Corral (2013); Marshall et al. (2016);
    Yu, Klaus, Yang, and Plenz (2014)).

    Estimating universal collapse shape
    Another error-prone step is the calculation and evaluation of the universal collapse shape, which is
    closely related to scaling relation analysis. Deriving the collapse shape from empirical data may be
    problematic because the goodness evaluation of collapse shape is rather subjective (e.g., depends on
    personal opinions about whether all data follows function H (·) in Eq. (48)) in most cases Marshall et al.
    (2016). Although important efforts have been devoted to quantify if a given data set exhibits shape
    collapse Bhattacharjee and Seno (2001); Shaukat and Thivierge (2016), common approaches in practice
    still depend on specific shape collapse algorithms that search potential scaling parameters (e.g., γ in Eq.
    (48)) in a data-driven manner Marshall et al. (2016). In these algorithms, thresholding on neural
    avalanches before analyzing the shape collapse is a standard pre-processing scheme to control noises
    (e.g., set an avalanche size threshold and remove all data below the threshold) Marshall et al. (2016);
    Papanikolaou et al. (2011). While experimental noises are partly limited, unexpected excursions of



                                                               –36–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    scaling parameters away from theoretical predictions may occur after thresholding as well Laurson, Illa,
    and Alava (2009). To our best knowledge, the effects of thresholding on brain criticality analysis are
    non-negligible. Although being highly practical, thresholding may lead to significant transient effects to
    cloud the true scaling property Villegas, di Santo, Burioni, and Muñoz (2019). Therefore, any qualitative
    evaluation of collapse shape after thresholding is questionable regardless of its practicability. Although
    an ideal approach requires further explorations, we suggest researchers to consider following methods:
    (1) estimate γ by area fitting (e.g., follow Eq. (47) in scaling relation analysis) and collapse shape fitting
    (e.g., follow Eq. (48) in collapse shape analysis), respectively; (2) compare between γ derived by these
    two kinds of fitting and measure the difference. Search for a threshold that minimizes the difference (e.g.,
    makes variation amplitude < 1%) and maintains a reasonable sample size (e.g., maintains > 80%
    samples); (3) Given the chosen threshold and corresponding γ, measure the difference (e.g., the dynamic
    time warping Keogh and Pazzani (2001)) between ⟨S (t | T )⟩T 1−γ derived on neural avalanches with
    different lifetime T in the plot of ⟨S (t | T )⟩T 1−γ vs. Tt . Denote the shape collapse error as the averaged
    difference. Combining these three steps, researchers may partly avoid the errors implied by subjective
    judgment. Similar ideas can be seen in Marshall et al. (2016).

    Estimating the slow decay of auto-correlation
    Finally, the analysis of slow decay of auto-correlation is also error-prone in practice. Although this
    approach is practical and has been extensively applied (e.g., Pausch et al. (2020); Wilting and Priesemann
    (2019)), the criterion to determine if the decay is truly slow (e.g., χ > 0 in Eq. (54) and ξ > 0 in Eq. (54)
    are sufficiently small) remains ambiguous. A fixed criterion (e.g., χ, ξ < 0.5) may serve as an explicit
    condition of a slow decay. However, this presupposed criterion may deviate from real situations. For
    instance, the baseline of decay rate in a non-critical brain may be essentially high (e.g., χ, ξ > 10). Even
    though the decay rate drops significantly when the brain becomes critical (e.g., χ, ξ ≃ 1), the
    presupposed criterion is still unsatisfied and leads to unnecessary controversies on criticality hypothesis.
    Given that ξ is principally independent from spatial sub-sampling on neurons or brain regions at
    criticality Pausch et al. (2020), we suggest researchers to consider the following approaches: (1) do
    spatial sub-sampling in both critical and non-critical brains to derive two groups of χ or ξ (one group for
    criticality and another group for non-criticality); (2) use appropriate statistic tests (e.g., choose t-test
    Kanji (2006), Kolmogorov-Smirnov test Berger and Zhou (2014), or Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test Fay



                                                               –37–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    and Proschan (2010) according to sample distribution properties) to verify if two groups of χ or ξ belong
    to different distributions. Test if the expectation and variance of χ or ξ drops significantly from the
    non-critical group to the critical group according to certain effect sizes.



    In summary, statistic techniques bridge between brain criticality theory and empirical data. However,
    misconception and misuse of statistic analyses of neural avalanche properties still occasionally appear in
    practice. Although existing techniques remain imperfect in brain criticality analysis, we wish that our
    discussion may inspire future studies.


    BRAIN CRITICALITY AND OTHER NEUROSCIENCE THEORIES
    Ever since brain criticality is introduced into neuroscience, it is frequently speculated as contradictory
    with other traditional neuroscience hypotheses, such as the conjectured hierarchical processing
    characteristic of neural information Felleman and Van Essen (1991) and the asynchronous-irregular
    characteristic of neural dynamics (e.g., neurons spike independently in Poisson manners Burns and Webb
    (1976); Softky and Koch (1993); Stein, Gossen, and Jones (2005)). Meanwhile, the differences between
    brain criticality and scale-free neural dynamics Chialvo (2010); He (2014); Martinello et al. (2017) are
    frequently neglected. Before we put an end to our review, we discuss the relations between brain
    criticality and these neuroscience theories.

    Brain criticality and hierarchical processing
    The hierarchical processing of neural information Felleman and Van Essen (1991) is initially speculated
    to contradict critical neural dynamics since hierarchical topology has not been used as a explicit
    condition to analytically derive criticality (e.g., see derivations in di Santo et al. (2017); Garcı́a-Pelayo et
    al. (1993); Gros (2010); Harris and Edward (1963); Janowsky and Laberge (1993); Larremore et al.
    (2012); D. S. Lee et al. (2004); Otter (1949); Robinson (2021)). On the contrary, random graphs without
    strict hierarchical structures seem to be more widespread in criticality derivations. Recently, this
    speculation has been challenged by numerous discoveries of the facilitation effects of hierarchical
    modular structures on critical dynamics E. J. Friedman and Landsberg (2013); Kaiser and Hilgetag
    (2010); Rubinov et al. (2011); S. Wang and Zhou (2012). Meanwhile, computational analysis suggests
    that information transmission in standard feed-forward networks is maximized by critical neural
    dynamics Beggs and Plenz (2003). Parallel to neuroscience, a recent machine learning study empirically

                                                               –38–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    observes and analytically demonstrates that artificial neural networks, a kind of hierarchical structure,
    self-organize to criticality during learning Katsnelson, Vanchurin, and Westerhout (2021). Therefore,
    brain criticality is not necessarily contradictory with hierarchical information processing, yet more
    analyses are required to understand how brain criticality affects hierarchical processing schemes.

    Brain criticality and asynchronous-irregular characteristic
    Brain criticality and the asynchronous-irregular (AI) characteristic may correspond to distinct encoding
    schemes in the brain Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021); Wilting and Priesemann (2019). While AI
    characteristic can minimize redundancy Atick (1992); Barlow et al. (1961); Bell and Sejnowski (1997);
    Van Hateren and van der Schaaf (1998) to improve neural encoding Van Vreeswijk and Sompolinsky
    (1996), brain criticality may optimize encoding performance utilizing a series of reverberations of neural
    activities Bertschinger and Natschläger (2004); Boedecker, Obst, Lizier, Mayer, and Asada (2012);
    Del Papa, Priesemann, and Triesch (2017); Haldeman and Beggs (2005); Kinouchi and Copelli (2006);
    Shew and Plenz (2013); X. R. Wang, Lizier, and Prokopenko (2011). The coexistence of empirical
    evidence of AI and brain criticality characteristics initially confuses researchers since these
    characteristics are hypothesized as contradictory with each other Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021); Wilting
    and Priesemann (2019). In experiments, AI characteristic is supported by small correlations between the
    spike rates of different neurons in cortical microcircuits Cohen and Kohn (2011); Ecker et al. (2010) and
    exponential distributions of inter-spike intervals Carandini and Stevens (2004); Kara, Reinagel, and Reid
    (2000) while brain criticality characteristic is observed in neural dynamics recorded from multiple
    species (e.g., awake monkeys Petermann et al. (2009), anesthetized rats Gireesh and Plenz (2008), slices
    of rat cortices Beggs and Plenz (2003); Shew et al. (2009), and humans Poil et al. (2008)). A recent study
    demonstrates that cortical spikes may propagate at somewhere between perfect criticality (e.g., OC or
    SOC depending on whether underlying mechanisms are exogenous or endogenous) and full irregularity
    Wilting and Priesemann (2019), similar to the cases of qC and SOqC. Meanwhile, it is known that
    stimulus drives suppress irregularity in neural activities Molgedey et al. (1992). These results imply that
    brain criticality may not necessarily contradict AI characteristic. On the contrary, they may coexist when
    stimulus drives are too weak to disturb brain criticality (e.g., OC or SOC) and suppress AI characteristic.
    In our previous discussions, we have analytically proven that neural avalanche exponents, the
    fundamental properties of brain criticality, can still be derived under the condition of independent neuron



                                                               –39–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    activation, a key feature of AI characteristic Wilting and Priesemann (2019). This result suggests that
    brain criticality and AI characteristic do not contradict each other. As for the case where stimulus drives
    are non-negligible, a recent study presents an elegant theory to prove that two homeostatic adaptation
    mechanisms (i.e., the short-term depression of inhibition and the spike-dependent threshold increase)
    enable synaptic excitation/inhibition balance, AI characteristic, and SOqC to appear simultaneously in
    the same neural dynamics Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021). Similarly, it is suggested that neural dynamics
    with criticality or with AI characteristic can be generated by the same neural populations if the synaptic
    excitation/inhibition balance is fine tuned appropriately J. Li and Shew (2020).

    Brain criticality and power-law behaviours in neural dynamics
    Neural dynamics with power-law behaviours is a necessary but insufficient condition of brain criticality.
    This property is frequently neglected in practice. Power-law behaviours are widespread in the nature
    because it can be generated by diverse mechanisms, such as exponential curve summation and
    preferential attachment Mitzenmacher (2004); Reed and Hughes (2002). It has been reported that the
    aggregate behaviours of non-critical stochastic systems may also create scale-free dynamics within a
    limited range Touboul and Destexhe (2010, 2017). In the brain, the generic scale-free properties can be
    implied by neutral dynamics, a kind of dynamics where the population size of neutral individuals (or
    dynamically homogeneous individuals) does not tend to increase or decrease after adding a new
    individual that is neutral to existing ones (see neutral theories for further explanations Blythe and
    McKane (2007); Liggett (2006)). This generic property can generate power-law neural avalanches
    without criticality Martinello et al. (2017). Meanwhile, bistability phenomena, a kind of fine tuned or
    self-organized discontinuous phase transitions with limit cycles rather than critical points, can also create
    neural dynamics with power-law properties Buendı́a, Di Santo, et al. (2020); Cocchi et al. (2017); di
    Santo, Burioni, Vezzani, and Munoz (2016). Consequently, we emphasize that neural avalanches
    exponents alone are insufficient to prove or disprove any brain criticality hypothesis. These power-law
    exponents are meaningless for brain criticality hypothesis unless they satisfy the scaling relation.

    BRAIN CRITICALITY: CONCLUSIONS ON CURRENT PROGRESSES AND LIMITATIONS
    Given what have been reviewed above, we arrive at a point to conclude on the current progresses and
    limitations in establishing theoretical foundations of different types of brain criticality, i.e., ordinary
    criticality (OC), quasi-criticality (qC), self-organized criticality (SOC), and self-organized


                                                               –40–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    quasi-criticality (SOqC). As we have suggested, an inescapable cause of various controversies is the
    non-triviality of physical theories that analytically derive brain criticality and statistic techniques that
    estimate brain criticality from empirical data. Immoderate omitting of these theoretical foundations,
    especially their imperfection, in practice may lead to confusions on the precise meaning, identification
    criteria, and biological corollaries of brain criticality. To address these problems, we have introduced
    mainstream theoretical foundations of brain criticality, reformulated them in the terminology of
    neuroscience, and discussed their mistakable details.


    Thanks to the increasing efforts devoted to improving theoretical frameworks of criticality in the brain,
    researchers have seen substantial progresses in explaining various important neuroscience problems,
    including but not limited to efficient cortical state transitions Fontenele et al. (2019), dynamic range
    maximization in neural responses Kinouchi and Copelli (2006); Shew et al. (2009), and optimization of
    information transmission and representation Shew et al. (2011). These advances have been
    comprehensively reviewed by existing works Beggs (2007); Chialvo (2010); Cocchi et al. (2017); Hesse
    and Gross (2014); Munoz (2018); Shew and Plenz (2013) and are no longer discussed in details in our
    review. The benefits of studying brain criticality, as we have suggested, lay in the possibility to analyze
    brain function characteristics with numerous statistical physics theories relevant to brain criticality, such
    as directed percolation Hinrichsen (2000); Lübeck (2004), conserved directed percolation Bonachela et
    al. (2010); Bonachela and Muñoz (2008), and dynamical percolation theories Bonachela et al. (2010);
    Steif (2009). These theories characterize the brain as a physical system with avalanche behaviors,
    enabling researchers to analyze various propagation, synchronization, and correlation properties of neural
    dynamics (e.g., continuous phase transitions). These properties intrinsically shape neural information
    processing (e.g., encoding Bertschinger and Natschläger (2004); Boedecker et al. (2012); Del Papa et al.
    (2017); Haldeman and Beggs (2005); Kinouchi and Copelli (2006); Shew and Plenz (2013); X. R. Wang
    et al. (2011), transmission Shew et al. (2011), and memory Haldeman and Beggs (2005); Krotov and
    Hopfield (2020)) and can be readily recorded in neuroscience experiments. Therefore, the
    non-equilibrium dynamic processes and potential criticality defined by statistical physics theories are
    highly applicable to characterizing brain functions. As we have discussed in Fig. 2, researchers can
    consider diverse brain criticality phenomena in neural dynamics by defining different control (e.g., the
    balance between excitatory and inhibitory neurons Hardstone et al. (2014); Poil et al. (2012)) and order

                                                               –41–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    (e.g., active neuron density Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019)) parameters, corresponding to multifarious
    biological mechanisms underlying neural dynamics (e.g., synaptic depression Levina et al. (2007)).
    Meanwhile, the definition of neural avalanches can flexibly change from neural spikes, local field
    potentials, to global cortical oscillations. The flexibility of brain criticality and neural avalanche
    definitions enables researchers to analyze different functional properties on distinct organizational levels
    in the brain.


    The limited theoretical foundations of brain criticality in the brain, however, have become irreconcilable
    with their increasingly widespread applications. Although the analytic theories of brain criticality have
    solid physics backgrounds, they needlessly become black boxes for neuroscientists in practice. On the
    one hand, the details of brain criticality theory frequently experience immoderate neglecting in
    neuroscience studies. On the other hand, to our best knowledge, there is no accessible and systematic
    introduction of the statistical physics foundations of brain criticality in the terminology of neuroscience
    yet. These obstacles severely impede neuroscientists from comprehensively understanding brain
    criticality, eventually motivating us to present this review. When we turn to bridging between brain
    criticality theories and experiments, one can find non-negligible gaps separating between theories and
    experiments. Although numerous biological factors (e.g., neural plasticity De Arcangelis et al. (2006);
    Levina et al. (2007, 2009), membrane potential leakage Levina et al. (2007); Millman et al. (2010);
    Rubinov et al. (2011); Stepp et al. (2015), retro-synaptic signals Hernandez-Urbina and Herrmann
    (2017), spatial heterogeneity Girardi-Schappo, Bortolotto, Gonsalves, Pinto, and Tragtenberg (2016);
    Moretti and Munoz (2013), and refractory period Fosque et al. (2021); Williams-Garcı́a et al. (2014))
    have been considered in brain criticality characterization, existing theories more or less suffer from
    deviations from actual neural system properties. For instance, the requirements of conserved neural
    dynamics and an infinite time scale separation between the dissipation and drive processes required by
    SOC may not be biologically realistic Munoz (2018). The implicit requirement of a sufficiently large
    system size by the mean field theories of brain criticality may not always be satisfied during neural
    avalanche recording, implying non-negligible finite size effects Girardi-Schappo (2021). Meanwhile,
    precisely verify the existence of a detailed type of brain criticality (e.g., confirm the actual universality
    class) in empirical neural data is principally infeasible. As we have explained, the common criteria used
    for brain criticality hypothesis verification, such as neural avalanche exponents Bauke (2007); Clauset et

                                                               –42–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    al. (2009); Deluca and Corral (2013); Marshall et al. (2016); Yu et al. (2014), scaling relation Lübeck
    (2004); Lübeck and Heger (2003), universal collapse shape Bhattacharjee and Seno (2001); Laurson et al.
    (2009); Marshall et al. (2016); Papanikolaou et al. (2011), and slow decay of auto-correlation Pausch et
    al. (2020); Wilting and Priesemann (2019), are derived according to directed percolation theory under
    mean field assumptions. Among four types of brain criticality in absorbing phase transitions, only OC
    originally belongs to directed percolation universality class while qC, SOC, and SOqC conditionally
    exhibit directed percolation behaviours. In most cases, one can only verify if the brain is plausibly at
    criticality (e.g., whether neural avalanches obey universal collapse and have the power-law exponents that
    satisfy the scaling relation). When observed neural avalanche exponents depart from their mean field
    approximation results but still satisfy the scaling relation, there may exist an OC phenomenon affected by
    non-mean-field factors (e.g., network topology Girardi-Schappo (2021)) or exist a certain qC, SOC, or
    SOqC phenomenon caused by diverse mechanisms. Additional information of neural dynamics
    properties is inevitably required to determine the category belonging of the hypothesized brain criticality,
    which poses daunting challenges to neuroscience experiment designs. Moreover, the potential validity
    issues of applying the theoretical tools derived from directed percolation theory to verify brain criticality
    in synchronous phase transitions deserve special attention (see Dalla Porta and Copelli (2019) for similar
    opinions). It remains controversial if absorbing and synchronous phase transitions robustly share specific
    features (see reported similarities Buendı́a et al. (2021); Di Santo et al. (2018); Fontenele et al. (2019);
    Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021) and differences Buendı́a et al. (2021); Fontenele et al. (2019);
    Girardi-Schappo et al. (2021)). Any speculated relations between these two kinds of critical phenomena
    should be tested with cautions. Furthermore, statistic techniques to estimate and verify brain criticality
    from empirical data are yet imperfect. The estimation of some properties of neural avalanches is
    error-prone in practice and may lead to serious validity issues. Although we suggest compromised
    solutions to these issues, more optimal approaches are required in future studies.

    BRAIN CRITICALITY: SUGGESTIONS OF FUTURE DIRECTION
    We pursue that this review not only summarizes latest developments in the field of studying criticality in
    the brain, but also serves as a blueprint for further explorations. Below, we offer concrete
    recommendations of future directions.




                                                               –43–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    First, we suggest researchers to carefully rethink the theoretical foundations of criticality in the brain.
    Immoderately omitting these foundations in neuroscience needlessly muddies an already complex
    scientific field and leads to potential validity issues. While we have presented a self-contained framework
    of brain criticality to characterize neural dynamics as a physical system with avalanches, plentiful details
    are uncovered in this article (e.g., the Landau–Ginzburg theory Di Santo et al. (2018)) because the
    statistical physics theories of brain criticality are essentially grand. We recommend researchers to further
    improve our work and explore a more accessible and systematic reformulation of related physics theories,
    such as directed percolation, conserved directed percolation, dynamic percolation, non-equilibrium
    dynamics, in the context of neuroscience. Moreover, we note that these theories are not initially proposed
    for brain analysis. It is normal to see gaps between these theories and real situations of the brain. We urge
    researchers to develop new variants of criticality formalism that is more applicable to the brain or even
    explore new universality classes of continuous phase transitions.




    Second, neuroscience is in urgent need of new physical theories and statistic techniques to bridge
    between brain criticality hypotheses and experiments. Although existing theories and techniques have
    become increasingly booming and covered most of the pivotal details of brain criticality, there remain
    various limitations as we have suggested. Specifically, we suggest five potential directions to resolve
    these problems: (1) combine brain criticality theories with large-scale neural dynamics recording or
    computation to include more realistic biological details into brain criticality theories and establish a
    closer connection with experimental observations; (2) try to summarize, standardize, and subdivide these
    theories according to the concrete biological meanings of brain criticality phenomena, prerequisites of
    model definitions, and scopes of application. Try to avoid abusing or misusing of different brain
    criticality theories; (3) develop open-source toolboxes of theoretical models and statistic techniques to
    routinize brain criticality analysis in neuroscience studies (one can see existing efforts to achieve this
    objective Marshall et al. (2016)); (4) establish open-source, multi-species, and large-scale data sets of
    neural dynamics recorded from both critical and non-critical brains. Validate different statistic techniques
    of brain criticality estimation and testing on these data sets and, more importantly, confirm appropriate
    baselines to define the criteria of brain criticality identification (see notable contributions in
    Girardi-Schappo (2021)); (5) explore new non-equilibrium statistical physics theories for synchronous

                                                               –44–
                                                      == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




    phase transitions or analytically verify the theoretical validity of directed percolation formulation of
    synchronous phase transitions.

    Third, parallel to neuroscience, the discoveries of critical phenomena in other learning and computation
    systems also merit attention. Learning or computing at the edge of chaos has been proven as a mechanism
    to optimize the performance of learners (e.g., recurrent neural networks Bertschinger and Natschläger
    (2004)). The well-known residual connections can control the performance degradation of artificial
    neural networks because they enable networks to self-organize to criticality between stability and chaos
    to preserve gradient information flows Yang and Schoenholz (2017). It is recently demonstrated that any
    artificial neural network generally self-organizes to criticality during the learning process Katsnelson et
    al. (2021). In the future, it would be interesting to explore whether information processing processes in
    brains and artificial neural networks can be universally characterized by a unified criticality theory.

    Overall, we anticipate the potential of well-validated studies of criticality in the brain to greatly deepen
    our understanding of neural dynamics characteristics and their roles in neural information processing.
    Laying solid theoretical foundations of studies is the most effective and indispensable path to
    contributing to this booming research area.

    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
    Correspondence of this paper should be addressed to P.S. Author Y.T. conceptualizes the idea, develops
    theoretical frameworks, and writes the manuscript. Authors Z.R.T. and H.D.H. contribute equally to
    developing mathematics of neural avalanche exponents. Author G.Q.L. contributes to reviewing and
    revising the manuscript. Authors A.H.C., Y.K.Q., and K.Y.W. contribute equally to the proof reading of
    Langevin formulation. Author C.C. contributes to literature collection and summarizing. Author P.S.
    contributes to idea conceptualization, manuscript writing, and project supervision. This project is
    supported by the Artificial and General Intelligence Research Program of Guo Qiang Research Institute
    at Tsinghua University (2020GQG1017) as well as the Tsinghua University Initiative Scientific Research
    Program. Authors are grateful for discussions and assistance of Drs. Yaoyuan Wang and Ziyang Zhang
    from the Laboratory of Advanced Computing and Storage, Central Research Institute, 2012 Laboratories,
    Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd., Beijing, 100084, China.




                                                               –45–
                                                         == D R A F T         ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE            /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




                                                             REFERENCES



      Abbott, L. F. (2008). Theoretical neuroscience rising. Neuron, 60(3), 489–495.


      Acebrón, J. A., Bonilla, L. L., Pérez Vicente, C. J., Ritort, F., & Spigler, R. (2005). The kuramoto model: A simple

         paradigm for synchronization phenomena. Rev. Mod. Phys., 77, 137–185. Retrieved from

         https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.77.137 doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.77.137


      Antonopoulos, C. G. (2016). Dynamic range in the c. elegans brain network. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of

         Nonlinear Science, 26(1), 013102.


      Arenas, A., Dı́az-Guilera, A., Kurths, J., Moreno, Y., & Zhou, C. (2008). Synchronization in complex networks. Physics

         reports, 469(3), 93–153.


      Atick, J. J. (1992). Could information theory provide an ecological theory of sensory processing? Network: Computation in

         neural systems, 3(2), 213–251.


      Bak, P. (2013). How nature works: the science of self-organized criticality. Springer Science & Business Media.


      Bak, P., & Sneppen, K. (1993). Punctuated equilibrium and criticality in a simple model of evolution. Physical review

         letters, 71(24), 4083.


      Bak, P., Tang, C., & Wiesenfeld, K. (1987). Self-organized criticality: An explanation of the 1/f noise. Physical review

         letters, 59(4), 381.


      Baldassarri, A., Colaiori, F., & Castellano, C. (2003). Average shape of a fluctuation: Universality in excursions of

         stochastic processes. Physical review letters, 90(6), 060601.


      Barlow, H. B., et al. (1961). Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages. Sensory

         communication, 1(01).


      Bassett, D. S., Greenfield, D. L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Weinberger, D. R., Moore, S. W., & Bullmore, E. T. (2010).

         Efficient physical embedding of topologically complex information processing networks in brains and computer circuits.

         PLoS computational biology, 6(4), e1000748.


                                                                  –46–
                                                         == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Bauke, H. (2007). Parameter estimation for power-law distributions by maximum likelihood methods. The European

         Physical Journal B, 58(2), 167–173.


      Beggs, J. M. (2007). How to build a critical mind. Nature Physics, 3(12), 835–835.


      Beggs, J. M., & Plenz, D. (2003). Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits. Journal of neuroscience, 23(35),

         11167–11177.


      Beggs, J. M., & Timme, N. (2012). Being critical of criticality in the brain. Frontiers in physiology, 3, 163.


      Bell, A. J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1997). The “independent components” of natural scenes are edge filters. Vision research,

         37(23), 3327–3338.


      Berger, V. W., & Zhou, Y. (2014). Kolmogorov–smirnov test: Overview. Wiley statsref: Statistics reference online.


      Bertschinger, N., & Natschläger, T. (2004). Real-time computation at the edge of chaos in recurrent neural networks.

         Neural computation, 16(7), 1413–1436.


      Betzel, R. F., Avena-Koenigsberger, A., Goñi, J., He, Y., De Reus, M. A., Griffa, A., . . . others (2016). Generative models of

         the human connectome. Neuroimage, 124, 1054–1064.


      Betzel, R. F., & Bassett, D. S. (2017a). Generative models for network neuroscience: prospects and promise. Journal of The

         Royal Society Interface, 14(136), 20170623.


      Betzel, R. F., & Bassett, D. S. (2017b). Multi-scale brain networks. Neuroimage, 160, 73–83.


      Betzel, R. F., Medaglia, J. D., & Bassett, D. S. (2018). Diversity of meso-scale architecture in human and non-human

         connectomes. Nature communications, 9(1), 1–14.


      Bhattacharjee, S. M., & Seno, F. (2001). A measure of data collapse for scaling. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and

         General, 34(33), 6375.


      Blythe, R. A., & McKane, A. J. (2007). Stochastic models of evolution in genetics, ecology and linguistics. Journal of

         Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2007(07), P07018.


                                                                  –47–
                                                          == D R A F T          ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Boedecker, J., Obst, O., Lizier, J. T., Mayer, N. M., & Asada, M. (2012). Information processing in echo state networks at

         the edge of chaos. Theory in Biosciences, 131(3), 205–213.


      Bonachela, J. A., De Franciscis, S., Torres, J. J., & Munoz, M. A. (2010). Self-organization without conservation: are

         neuronal avalanches generically critical? Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2010(02), P02015.


      Bonachela, J. A., & Muñoz, M. A. (2008). Confirming and extending the hypothesis of universality in sandpiles. Physical

         Review E, 78(4), 041102.


      Bonachela, J. A., & Munoz, M. A. (2009). Self-organization without conservation: true or just apparent scale-invariance?

         Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2009(09), P09009.


      Breskin, I., Soriano, J., Moses, E., & Tlusty, T. (2006). Percolation in living neural networks. Physical review letters,

         97(18), 188102.


      Buendı́a, V., Di Santo, S., Bonachela, J. A., & Muñoz, M. A. (2020). Feedback mechanisms for self-organization to the

         edge of a phase transition. Frontiers in physics, 8, 333.


      Buendı́a, V., di Santo, S., Villegas, P., Burioni, R., & Muñoz, M. A. (2020). Self-organized bistability and its possible

         relevance for brain dynamics. Physical Review Research, 2(1), 013318.


      Buendı́a, V., Villegas, P., Burioni, R., & Munoz, M. A. (2021). Hybrid-type synchronization transitions: Where incipient

         oscillations, scale-free avalanches, and bistability live together. Physical Review Research, 3(2), 023224.


      Bullmore, E., & Sporns, O. (2012). The economy of brain network organization. Nature reviews neuroscience, 13(5),

         336–349.


      Burns, B. D., & Webb, A. (1976). The spontaneous activity of neurones in the cat’s cerebral cortex. Proceedings of the

         Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences, 194(1115), 211–223.


      Capolupo, A., Freeman, W. J., & Vitiello, G. (2013). Dissipation of ‘dark energy’by cortex in knowledge retrieval. Physics

         of life reviews, 10(1), 85–94.


      Carandini, M., & Stevens, C. (2004). Amplification of trial-to-trial response variability by neurons in visual cortex. PLoS

         biology, 2(9), e264.


                                                                     –48–
                                                          == D R A F T          ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE              /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Cardin, J. A. (2019). Functional flexibility in cortical circuits. Current opinion in neurobiology, 58, 175–180.


      Carvalho, T. T., Fontenele, A. J., Girardi-Schappo, M., Feliciano, T., Aguiar, L. A., Silva, T. P., . . . Copelli, M. (2021).

         Subsampled directed-percolation models explain scaling relations experimentally observed in the brain. Frontiers in

         neural circuits, 83.


      Chialvo, D. R. (2010). Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nature physics, 6(10), 744–750.


      Chiappalone, M., Vato, A., Marcoli, M., Davide, F., Martinoia, S., et al. (2003). Networks of neurons coupled to

         microelectrode arrays: a neuronal sensory system for pharmacological applications. Biosensors and Bioelectronics,

         18(5-6), 627–634.


      Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., & Newman, M. E. (2009). Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM review, 51(4),

         661–703.


      Cocchi, L., Gollo, L. L., Zalesky, A., & Breakspear, M. (2017). Criticality in the brain: A synthesis of neurobiology, models

         and cognition. Progress in neurobiology, 158, 132–152.


      Cohen, M. R., & Kohn, A. (2011). Measuring and interpreting neuronal correlations. Nature neuroscience, 14(7), 811–819.


      Collell, G., & Fauquet, J. (2015). Brain activity and cognition: a connection from thermodynamics and information theory.

         Frontiers in psychology, 6, 818.


      Dalla Porta, L., & Copelli, M. (2019). Modeling neuronal avalanches and long-range temporal correlations at the emergence

         of collective oscillations: Continuously varying exponents mimic m/eeg results. PLoS computational biology, 15(4),

         e1006924.


      David, O., & Friston, K. J. (2003). A neural mass model for meg/eeg:: coupling and neuronal dynamics. NeuroImage,

         20(3), 1743–1755.


      de Andrade Costa, A., Copelli, M., & Kinouchi, O. (2015). Can dynamical synapses produce true self-organized criticality?

         Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2015(6), P06004.


      de Arcangelis, L., & Herrmann, H. J. (2010). Learning as a phenomenon occurring in a critical state. Proceedings of the

         National Academy of Sciences, 107(9), 3977–3981.


                                                                   –49–
                                                         == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      De Arcangelis, L., Perrone-Capano, C., & Herrmann, H. J. (2006). Self-organized criticality model for brain plasticity.

         Physical review letters, 96(2), 028107.


      Deco, G., Tononi, G., Boly, M., & Kringelbach, M. L. (2015). Rethinking segregation and integration: contributions of

         whole-brain modelling. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 16(7), 430–439.


      Del Papa, B., Priesemann, V., & Triesch, J. (2017). Criticality meets learning: Criticality signatures in a self-organizing

         recurrent neural network. PloS one, 12(5), e0178683.


      Del Pozo, S. M., Laufs, H., Bonhomme, V., Laureys, S., Balenzuela, P., & Tagliazucchi, E. (2021). Unconsciousness

         reconfigures modular brain network dynamics. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 31(9), 093117.


      Deluca, A., & Corral, Á. (2013). Fitting and goodness-of-fit test of non-truncated and truncated power-law distributions.

         Acta Geophysica, 61(6), 1351–1394.


      Dickman, R., Muñoz, M. A., Vespignani, A., & Zapperi, S. (2000). Paths to self-organized criticality. Brazilian Journal of

         Physics, 30(1), 27–41.


      Dickman, R., Vespignani, A., & Zapperi, S. (1998). Self-organized criticality as an absorbing-state phase transition.

         Physical Review E, 57(5), 5095.


      di Santo, S., Burioni, R., Vezzani, A., & Munoz, M. A. (2016). Self-organized bistability associated with first-order phase

         transitions. Physical review letters, 116(24), 240601.


      di Santo, S., Villegas, P., Burioni, R., & Muñoz, M. A. (2017). Simple unified view of branching process statistics: Random

         walks in balanced logarithmic potentials. Physical Review E, 95(3), 032115.


      Di Santo, S., Villegas, P., Burioni, R., & Muñoz, M. A. (2018). Landau–ginzburg theory of cortex dynamics: Scale-free

         avalanches emerge at the edge of synchronization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(7),

         E1356–E1365.


      Ecker, A. S., Berens, P., Keliris, G. A., Bethge, M., Logothetis, N. K., & Tolias, A. S. (2010). Decorrelated neuronal firing

         in cortical microcircuits. science, 327(5965), 584–587.


                                                                   –50–
                                                            == D R A F T          ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE               /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Effenberger, F., Jost, J., & Levina, A. (2015). Self-organization in balanced state networks by stdp and homeostatic

         plasticity. PLoS computational biology, 11(9), e1004420.


      Erdos, L., Kruger, T., & Renfrew, D. (2018). Power law decay for systems of randomly coupled differential equations.

         SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 50(3), 3271–3290.


      Fay, M. P., & Proschan, M. A. (2010). Wilcoxon-mann-whitney or t-test? on assumptions for hypothesis tests and multiple

         interpretations of decision rules. Statistics surveys, 4, 1.


      Felleman, D. J., & Van Essen, D. C. (1991). Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cerebral

         cortex (New York, NY: 1991), 1(1), 1–47.


      Fontenele, A. J., de Vasconcelos, N. A., Feliciano, T., Aguiar, L. A., Soares-Cunha, C., Coimbra, B., . . . others (2019).

         Criticality between cortical states. Physical review letters, 122(20), 208101.


      Fosque, L. J., Williams-Garcı́a, R. V., Beggs, J. M., & Ortiz, G. (2021). Evidence for quasicritical brain dynamics. Physical

         Review Letters, 126(9), 098101.


      Franke, F., Fiscella, M., Sevelev, M., Roska, B., Hierlemann, A., & da Silveira, R. A. (2016). Structures of neural

         correlation and how they favor coding. Neuron, 89(2), 409–422.


      Friedman, E. J., & Landsberg, A. S. (2013). Hierarchical networks, power laws, and neuronal avalanches. Chaos: An

         Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 23(1), 013135.


      Friedman, N., Ito, S., Brinkman, B. A., Shimono, M., DeVille, R. L., Dahmen, K. A., . . . Butler, T. C. (2012). Universal

         critical dynamics in high resolution neuronal avalanche data. Physical review letters, 108(20), 208102.


      Fristedt, B. E., & Gray, L. F. (2013). A modern approach to probability theory. Springer Science & Business Media.


      Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends in cognitive sciences, 13(7), 293–301.


      Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature reviews neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.


      Galván, A. (2010). Neural plasticity of development and learning. Human brain mapping, 31(6), 879–890.


                                                                        –51–
                                                         == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE              /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Ganmor, E., Segev, R., & Schneidman, E. (2011). Sparse low-order interaction network underlies a highly correlated and

         learnable neural population code. Proceedings of the National Academy of sciences, 108(23), 9679–9684.


      Garcı́a-Pelayo, R., Salazar, I., & Schieve, W. C. (1993). A branching process model for sand avalanches. Journal of

         statistical physics, 72(1), 167–187.


      Gautam, S. H., Hoang, T. T., McClanahan, K., Grady, S. K., & Shew, W. L. (2015). Maximizing sensory dynamic range by

         tuning the cortical state to criticality. PLoS computational biology, 11(12), e1004576.


      Gerstner, W., Kistler, W. M., Naud, R., & Paninski, L. (2014). Neuronal dynamics: From single neurons to networks and

         models of cognition. Cambridge University Press.


      Girardi-Schappo, M. (2021). Brain criticality beyond avalanches: open problems and how to approach them. Journal of

         Physics: Complexity.


      Girardi-Schappo, M., Bortolotto, G. S., Gonsalves, J. J., Pinto, L. T., & Tragtenberg, M. H. (2016). Griffiths phase and

         long-range correlations in a biologically motivated visual cortex model. Scientific reports, 6(1), 1–12.


      Girardi-Schappo, M., Galera, E. F., Carvalho, T. T., Brochini, L., Kamiji, N. L., Roque, A. C., & Kinouchi, O. (2021). A

         unified theory of e/i synaptic balance, quasicritical neuronal avalanches and asynchronous irregular spiking. Journal of

         Physics: Complexity, 2(4), 045001.


      Gireesh, E. D., & Plenz, D. (2008). Neuronal avalanches organize as nested theta-and beta/gamma-oscillations during

         development of cortical layer 2/3. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(21), 7576–7581.


      Gnesotto, F. S., Mura, F., Gladrow, J., & Broedersz, C. P. (2018). Broken detailed balance and non-equilibrium dynamics in

         living systems: a review. Reports on Progress in Physics, 81(6), 066601.


      Gong, G., He, Y., Concha, L., Lebel, C., Gross, D. W., Evans, A. C., & Beaulieu, C. (2009). Mapping anatomical

         connectivity patterns of human cerebral cortex using in vivo diffusion tensor imaging tractography. Cerebral cortex,

         19(3), 524–536.


      Gros, C. (2010). Complex and adaptive dynamical systems. Springer.


      Guevara, R. (2021). Synchronization, free energy and the embryogenesis of the cortex. Physics of Life Reviews, 36, 5–6.


                                                                  –52–
                                                          == D R A F T         ==
                  Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Guo, S., Chen, X., Liu, Y., Kang, R., Liu, T., & Li, D. (2021). Percolation analysis of brain structural network. Frontiers in

         Physics, 9, 345.


      Hahn, G., Ponce-Alvarez, A., Monier, C., Benvenuti, G., Kumar, A., Chavane, F., . . . Frégnac, Y. (2017). Spontaneous

         cortical activity is transiently poised close to criticality. PLoS computational biology, 13(5), e1005543.


      Haimovici, A., Tagliazucchi, E., Balenzuela, P., & Chialvo, D. R. (2013). Brain organization into resting state networks

         emerges at criticality on a model of the human connectome. Physical review letters, 110(17), 178101.


      Haldeman, C., & Beggs, J. M. (2005). Critical branching captures activity in living neural networks and maximizes the

         number of metastable states. Physical review letters, 94(5), 058101.


      Hardstone, R., Mansvelder, H. D., & Linkenkaer-Hansen, K. (2014). The neuronal network oscillation as a critical

         phenomenon. Criticality in Neural Systems. Wiley, 293–316.


      Harris, & Edward, T. (1963). The theory of branching processes (Vol. 6). Springer Berlin.


      He, B. J. (2014). Scale-free brain activity: past, present, and future. Trends in cognitive sciences, 18(9), 480–487.


      Henkel, M., Hinrichsen, H., Lübeck, S., & Pleimling, M. (2008). Non-equilibrium phase transitions (Vol. 1). Springer.


      Hernandez-Urbina, V., & Herrmann, J. M. (2017). Self-organized criticality via retro-synaptic signals. Frontiers in Physics,

         4, 54.


      Hesse, J., & Gross, T. (2014). Self-organized criticality as a fundamental property of neural systems. Frontiers in systems

         neuroscience, 8, 166.


      Hinrichsen, H. (2000). Non-equilibrium critical phenomena and phase transitions into absorbing states. Advances in

         physics, 49(7), 815–958.


      Holcman, D., & Tsodyks, M. (2006). The emergence of up and down states in cortical networks. PLoS computational

         biology, 2(3), e23.


      Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities. Proceedings

         of the national academy of sciences, 79(8), 2554–2558.


                                                                  –53–
                                                          == D R A F T           ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE              /      Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Janowsky, S. A., & Laberge, C. A. (1993). Exact solutions for a mean-field abelian sandpile. Journal of Physics A:

         Mathematical and General, 26(19), L973.


      Jercog, D., Roxin, A., Bartho, P., Luczak, A., Compte, A., & de la Rocha, J. (2017). Up-down cortical dynamics reflect state

         transitions in a bistable network. Elife, 6, e22425.


      Jung, N., Le, Q. A., Lee, K.-E., & Lee, J. W. (2020). Avalanche size distribution of an integrate-and-fire neural model on

         complex networks. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 30(6), 063118.


      Kaiser, M., & Hilgetag, C. C. (2006). Nonoptimal component placement, but short processing paths, due to long-distance

         projections in neural systems. PLoS computational biology, 2(7), e95.


      Kaiser, M., & Hilgetag, C. C. (2010). Optimal hierarchical modular topologies for producing limited sustained activation of

         neural networks. Frontiers in neuroinformatics, 4, 8.


      Kanji, G. K. (2006). 100 statistical tests. Sage.


      Kara, P., Reinagel, P., & Reid, R. C. (2000). Low response variability in simultaneously recorded retinal, thalamic, and

         cortical neurons. Neuron, 27(3), 635–646.


      Katsnelson, M. I., Vanchurin, V., & Westerhout, T. (2021). Self-organized criticality in neural networks. arXiv preprint

         arXiv:2107.03402.


      Keogh, E. J., & Pazzani, M. J. (2001). Derivative dynamic time warping. In Proceedings of the 2001 siam international

         conference on data mining (pp. 1–11).


      Khambhati, A. N., Sizemore, A. E., Betzel, R. F., & Bassett, D. S. (2018). Modeling and interpreting mesoscale network

         dynamics. NeuroImage, 180, 337–349.


      Kinouchi, O., & Copelli, M. (2006). Optimal dynamical range of excitable networks at criticality. Nature physics, 2(5),

         348–351.


      Krotov, D., & Hopfield, J. (2020). Large associative memory problem in neurobiology and machine learning. arXiv preprint

         arXiv:2008.06996.


                                                                    –54–
                                                         == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE              /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Larremore, D. B., Carpenter, M. Y., Ott, E., & Restrepo, J. G. (2012). Statistical properties of avalanches in networks.

         Physical Review E, 85(6), 066131.


      Laurson, L., & Alava, M. J. (2006). 1/ f noise and avalanche scaling in plastic deformation. Physical Review E, 74(6),

         066106.


      Laurson, L., Illa, X., & Alava, M. J. (2009). The effect of thresholding on temporal avalanche statistics. Journal of

         Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2009(01), P01019.


      Laurson, L., Illa, X., Santucci, S., Tore Tallakstad, K., Måløy, K. J., & Alava, M. J. (2013). Evolution of the average

         avalanche shape with the universality class. Nature communications, 4(1), 1–6.


      Lee, D. S., Goh, K. I., Kahng, B., & Kim, D. (2004). Branching process approach to avalanche dynamics on complex

         networks. JOURNAL-KOREAN PHYSICAL SOCIETY, 44(1), 633–637.


      Lee, H., Wang, S., & Hudetz, A. G. (2020). State-dependent cortical unit activity reflects dynamic brain state transitions in

         anesthesia. Journal of Neuroscience, 40(49), 9440–9454.


      Levina, A., Herrmann, J. M., & Geisel, T. (2007). Dynamical synapses causing self-organized criticality in neural networks.

         Nature physics, 3(12), 857–860.


      Levina, A., Herrmann, J. M., & Geisel, T. (2009). Phase transitions towards criticality in a neural system with adaptive

         interactions. Physical review letters, 102(11), 118110.


      Li, J., & Shew, W. L. (2020). Tuning network dynamics from criticality to an asynchronous state. PLOS Computational

         Biology, 16(9), e1008268.


      Li, X., & Small, M. (2012). Neuronal avalanches of a self-organized neural network with active-neuron-dominant structure.

         Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 22(2), 023104.


      Liggett, T. M. (2006). Interacting particle systems. Springer Science & Business Media.


      Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikouline, V. V., Palva, J. M., & Ilmoniemi, R. J. (2001). Long-range temporal correlations and

         scaling behavior in human brain oscillations. Journal of Neuroscience, 21(4), 1370–1377.


                                                                   –55–
                                                         == D R A F T         ==
                 Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Lombardi, F., Herrmann, H. J., & de Arcangelis, L. (2017). Balance of excitation and inhibition determines 1/f power

         spectrum in neuronal networks. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 27(4), 047402.


      Lübeck, S. (2004). Universal scaling behavior of non-equilibrium phase transitions. International Journal of Modern

         Physics B, 18(31n32), 3977–4118.


      Lübeck, S., & Heger, P. (2003). Universal finite-size scaling behavior and universal dynamical scaling behavior of

         absorbing phase transitions with a conserved field. Physical Review E, 68(5), 056102.


      Lynn, C. W., & Bassett, D. S. (2019). The physics of brain network structure, function and control. Nature Reviews Physics,

         1(5), 318–332.


      Lynn, C. W., Cornblath, E. J., Papadopoulos, L., Bertolero, M. A., & Bassett, D. S. (2021). Broken detailed balance and

         entropy production in the human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(47).


      Ma, Z., Turrigiano, G. G., Wessel, R., & Hengen, K. B. (2019). Cortical circuit dynamics are homeostatically tuned to

         criticality in vivo. Neuron, 104(4), 655–664.


      Malcai, O., Shilo, Y., & Biham, O. (2006). Dissipative sandpile models with universal exponents. Physical Review E, 73(5),

         056125.


      Manna, S. S. (1991). Two-state model of self-organized criticality. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 24(7),

         L363.


      Mariani, B., Nicoletti, G., Bisio, M., Maschietto, M., Oboe, R., Suweis, S., & Vassanelli, S. (2021). Beyond resting state

         neuronal avalanches in the somatosensory barrel cortex. bioRxiv.


      Marković, D., & Gros, C. (2014). Power laws and self-organized criticality in theory and nature. Physics Reports, 536(2),

         41–74.


      Marshall, N., Timme, N. M., Bennett, N., Ripp, M., Lautzenhiser, E., & Beggs, J. M. (2016). Analysis of power laws, shape

         collapses, and neural complexity: new techniques and matlab support via the ncc toolbox. Frontiers in physiology, 7, 250.


      Martinello, M., Hidalgo, J., Maritan, A., Di Santo, S., Plenz, D., & Munoz, M. A. (2017). Neutral theory and scale-free

         neural dynamics. Physical Review X, 7(4), 041071.


                                                                 –56–
                                                        == D R A F T          ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE           /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Mehta, A. P., Mills, A. C., Dahmen, K. A., & Sethna, J. P. (2002). Universal pulse shape scaling function and exponents:

         Critical test for avalanche models applied to barkhausen noise. Physical Review E, 65(4), 046139.


      Meisel, C., & Gross, T. (2009). Adaptive self-organization in a realistic neural network model. Physical Review E, 80(6),

         061917.


      Meisel, C., Olbrich, E., Shriki, O., & Achermann, P. (2013). Fading signatures of critical brain dynamics during sustained

         wakefulness in humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(44), 17363–17372.


      Miller, P., & Wang, X.-J. (2006). Power-law neuronal fluctuations in a recurrent network model of parametric working

         memory. Journal of neurophysiology, 95(2), 1099–1114.


      Millman, D., Mihalas, S., Kirkwood, A., & Niebur, E. (2010). Self-organized criticality occurs in non-conservative neuronal

         networks during ‘up’states. Nature physics, 6(10), 801–805.


      Mitzenmacher, M. (2004). A brief history of generative models for power law and lognormal distributions. Internet

         mathematics, 1(2), 226–251.


      Molgedey, L., Schuchhardt, J., & Schuster, H. G. (1992). Suppressing chaos in neural networks by noise. Physical review

         letters, 69(26), 3717.


      Montague, P. R., Dayan, P., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1996). A framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems based on

         predictive hebbian learning. Journal of neuroscience, 16(5), 1936–1947.


      Moretti, P., & Munoz, M. A. (2013). Griffiths phases and the stretching of criticality in brain networks. Nature

         communications, 4(1), 1–10.


      Munoz, M. A. (2018). Colloquium: Criticality and dynamical scaling in living systems. Reviews of Modern Physics, 90(3),

         031001.


      Narayan, O., & Middleton, A. A. (1994). Avalanches and the renormalization group for pinned charge-density waves.

         Physical Review B, 49(1), 244.


      Otter, R. (1949). The multiplicative process. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 20(2), 206–224.


                                                                 –57–
                                                           == D R A F T         ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE               /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Palva, J. M., Zhigalov, A., Hirvonen, J., Korhonen, O., Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., & Palva, S. (2013). Neuronal long-range

         temporal correlations and avalanche dynamics are correlated with behavioral scaling laws. Proceedings of the National

         Academy of Sciences, 110(9), 3585–3590.


      Papanikolaou, S., Bohn, F., Sommer, R. L., Durin, G., Zapperi, S., & Sethna, J. P. (2011). Universality beyond power laws

         and the average avalanche shape. Nature Physics, 7(4), 316–320.


      Pausch, J., Garcia-Millan, R., & Pruessner, G. (2020). Time-dependent branching processes: a model of oscillating neuronal

         avalanches. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 1–17.


      Perl, Y. S., Bocaccio, H., Pallavicini, C., Pérez-Ipiña, I., Laureys, S., Laufs, H., . . . Tagliazucchi, E. (2021). Nonequilibrium

         brain dynamics as a signature of consciousness. Physical Review E, 104(1), 014411.


      Petermann, T., Thiagarajan, T. C., Lebedev, M. A., Nicolelis, M. A., Chialvo, D. R., & Plenz, D. (2009). Spontaneous

         cortical activity in awake monkeys composed of neuronal avalanches. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

         106(37), 15921–15926.


      Poil, S.-S., Hardstone, R., Mansvelder, H. D., & Linkenkaer-Hansen, K. (2012). Critical-state dynamics of avalanches and

         oscillations jointly emerge from balanced excitation/inhibition in neuronal networks. Journal of Neuroscience, 32(29),

         9817–9823.


      Poil, S.-S., van Ooyen, A., & Linkenkaer-Hansen, K. (2008). Avalanche dynamics of human brain oscillations: relation to

         critical branching processes and temporal correlations. Human brain mapping, 29(7), 770–777.


      Ponce-Alvarez, A., Jouary, A., Privat, M., Deco, G., & Sumbre, G. (2018). Whole-brain neuronal activity displays crackling

         noise dynamics. Neuron, 100(6), 1446–1459.


      Rao, M. M., & Swift, R. J. (2006). Probability theory with applications (Vol. 582). Springer Science & Business Media.


      Reed, W. J., & Hughes, B. D. (2002). From gene families and genera to incomes and internet file sizes: Why power laws are

         so common in nature. Physical Review E, 66(6), 067103.


      Reimer, J., Froudarakis, E., Cadwell, C. R., Yatsenko, D., Denfield, G. H., & Tolias, A. S. (2014). Pupil fluctuations track

         fast switching of cortical states during quiet wakefulness. neuron, 84(2), 355–362.


                                                                    –58–
                                                         == D R A F T         ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Reiss, R.-D., & Thomas, M. (2007). Statistical analysis of extreme values: With applications to insurance, finance,

         hydrology and other fields. Springer Science & Business Media.


      Ribeiro, T. L., Copelli, M., Caixeta, F., Belchior, H., Chialvo, D. R., Nicolelis, M. A., & Ribeiro, S. (2010). Spike

         avalanches exhibit universal dynamics across the sleep-wake cycle. PloS one, 5(11), e14129.


      Robert, P., & Vignoud, G. (2021). Stochastic models of neural synaptic plasticity: A scaling approach. SIAM Journal on

         Applied Mathematics, 81(6), 2362–2386.


      Robinson, P. (2021). Neural field theory of neural avalanche exponents. Biological cybernetics, 115(3), 237–243.


      Rubinov, M., Sporns, O., Thivierge, J.-P., & Breakspear, M. (2011). Neurobiologically realistic determinants of

         self-organized criticality in networks of spiking neurons. PLoS computational biology, 7(6), e1002038.


      Sartori, P., Granger, L., Lee, C. F., & Horowitz, J. M. (2014). Thermodynamic costs of information processing in sensory

         adaptation. PLoS computational biology, 10(12), e1003974.


      Schaworonkow, N., Blythe, D. A., Kegeles, J., Curio, G., & Nikulin, V. V. (2015). Power-law dynamics in neuronal and

         behavioral data introduce spurious correlations. Human brain mapping, 36(8), 2901–2914.


      Schneidman, E., Berry, M. J., Segev, R., & Bialek, W. (2006). Weak pairwise correlations imply strongly correlated network

         states in a neural population. Nature, 440(7087), 1007–1012.


      Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. The annals of statistics, 461–464.


      Scott, & Alwyn. (1977). Neurophysics. John Wiley & Sons Incorporated.


      Scott, G., Fagerholm, E. D., Mutoh, H., Leech, R., Sharp, D. J., Shew, W. L., & Knöpfel, T. (2014). Voltage imaging of

         waking mouse cortex reveals emergence of critical neuronal dynamics. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(50), 16611–16620.


      Senzai, Y., Fernandez-Ruiz, A., & Buzsáki, G. (2019). Layer-specific physiological features and interlaminar interactions in

         the primary visual cortex of the mouse. Neuron, 101(3), 500–513.


      Sethna, J. P., Dahmen, K. A., & Myers, C. R. (2001). Crackling noise. Nature, 410(6825), 242–250.


                                                                  –59–
                                                           == D R A F T        ==
                  Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE            /   Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Shaukat, A., & Thivierge, J.-P. (2016). Statistical evaluation of waveform collapse reveals scale-free properties of neuronal

         avalanches. Frontiers in computational neuroscience, 10, 29.


      Shew, W. L., Clawson, W. P., Pobst, J., Karimipanah, Y., Wright, N. C., & Wessel, R. (2015). Adaptation to sensory input

         tunes visual cortex to criticality. Nature Physics, 11(8), 659–663.


      Shew, W. L., & Plenz, D. (2013). The functional benefits of criticality in the cortex. The neuroscientist, 19(1), 88–100.


      Shew, W. L., Yang, H., Petermann, T., Roy, R., & Plenz, D. (2009). Neuronal avalanches imply maximum dynamic range in

         cortical networks at criticality. Journal of neuroscience, 29(49), 15595–15600.


      Shew, W. L., Yang, H., Yu, S., Roy, R., & Plenz, D. (2011). Information capacity and transmission are maximized in

         balanced cortical networks with neuronal avalanches. Journal of neuroscience, 31(1), 55–63.


      Shin, C.-W., & Kim, S. (2006). Self-organized criticality and scale-free properties in emergent functional neural networks.

         Physical Review E, 74(4), 045101.


      Shriki, O., Alstott, J., Carver, F., Holroyd, T., Henson, R. N., Smith, M. L., . . . Plenz, D. (2013). Neuronal avalanches in the

         resting meg of the human brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(16), 7079–7090.


      Smit, D. J., de Geus, E. J., van de Nieuwenhuijzen, M. E., van Beijsterveldt, C. E., van Baal, G. C. M., Mansvelder, H. D.,

         . . . Linkenkaer-Hansen, K. (2011). Scale-free modulation of resting-state neuronal oscillations reflects prolonged brain

         maturation in humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(37), 13128–13136.


      Softky, W. R., & Koch, C. (1993). The highly irregular firing of cortical cells is inconsistent with temporal integration of

         random epsps. Journal of neuroscience, 13(1), 334–350.


      Song, S., Miller, K. D., & Abbott, L. F. (2000). Competitive hebbian learning through spike-timing-dependent synaptic

         plasticity. Nature neuroscience, 3(9), 919–926.


      Sornette, D., Johansen, A., & Dornic, I. (1995). Mapping self-organized criticality onto criticality. Journal de Physique I,

         5(3), 325–335.


      Squire, L., Berg, D., Bloom, F. E., Du Lac, S., Ghosh, A., & Spitzer, N. C. (2012). Fundamental neuroscience. Academic

         press.


                                                                   –60–
                                                         == D R A F T          ==
               Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE             /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Steif, J. E. (2009). A survey of dynamical percolation. In Fractal geometry and stochastics iv (pp. 145–174). Springer.


      Stein, R. B., Gossen, E. R., & Jones, K. E. (2005). Neuronal variability: noise or part of the signal? Nature Reviews

         Neuroscience, 6(5), 389–397.


      Stepp, N., Plenz, D., & Srinivasa, N. (2015). Synaptic plasticity enables adaptive self-tuning critical networks. PLoS

         computational biology, 11(1), e1004043.


      Stewart, C. V., & Plenz, D. (2006). Inverted-u profile of dopamine–nmda-mediated spontaneous avalanche recurrence in

         superficial layers of rat prefrontal cortex. Journal of neuroscience, 26(31), 8148–8159.


      Stewart, C. V., & Plenz, D. (2008). Homeostasis of neuronal avalanches during postnatal cortex development in vitro.

         Journal of neuroscience methods, 169(2), 405–416.


      Tagliazucchi, E., Balenzuela, P., Fraiman, D., & Chialvo, D. R. (2012). Criticality in large-scale brain fmri dynamics

         unveiled by a novel point process analysis. Frontiers in physiology, 3, 15.


      Tian, Y., Li, G., & Sun, P. (2021). Bridging the information and dynamics attributes of neural activities. Physical Review

         Research, 3(4), 043085.


      Tian, Y., & Sun, P. (2021). Characteristics of the neural coding of causality. Physical Review E, 103(1), 012406.


      Tian, Y., & Sun, P. (2022). Information thermodynamics of encoding and encoders. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of

         Nonlinear Science, 32(6), 063109.


      Tkačik, G., Mora, T., Marre, O., Amodei, D., Palmer, S. E., Berry, M. J., & Bialek, W. (2015). Thermodynamics and

         signatures of criticality in a network of neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(37),

         11508–11513.


      Touboul, J., & Destexhe, A. (2010). Can power-law scaling and neuronal avalanches arise from stochastic dynamics? PloS

         one, 5(2), e8982.


      Touboul, J., & Destexhe, A. (2017). Power-law statistics and universal scaling in the absence of criticality. Physical Review

         E, 95(1), 012413.


                                                                  –61–
                                                         == D R A F T          ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE            /     Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Touboul, J., Wendling, F., Chauvel, P., & Faugeras, O. (2011). Neural mass activity, bifurcations, and epilepsy. Neural

         computation, 23(12), 3232–3286.


      Tyulmankov, D., Fang, C., Vadaparty, A., & Yang, G. R. (2021). Biological key-value memory networks. Advances in

         Neural Information Processing Systems, 34.


      Van Hateren, J. H., & van der Schaaf, A. (1998). Independent component filters of natural images compared with simple

         cells in primary visual cortex. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 265(1394),

         359–366.


      Van Vreeswijk, C., & Sompolinsky, H. (1996). Chaos in neuronal networks with balanced excitatory and inhibitory activity.

         Science, 274(5293), 1724–1726.


      Varley, T. F., Sporns, O., Puce, A., & Beggs, J. (2020). Differential effects of propofol and ketamine on critical brain

         dynamics. PLoS computational biology, 16(12), e1008418.


      Villegas, P., di Santo, S., Burioni, R., & Muñoz, M. A. (2019). Time-series thresholding and the definition of avalanche size.

         Physical Review E, 100(1), 012133.


      Villegas, P., Moretti, P., & Munoz, M. A. (2014). Frustrated hierarchical synchronization and emergent complexity in the

         human connectome network. Scientific reports, 4(1), 1–7.


      Virkar, Y., & Clauset, A. (2014). Power-law distributions in binned empirical data. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 8(1),

         89–119.


      Vuong, Q. H. (1989). Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and non-nested hypotheses. Econometrica: Journal of the

         Econometric Society, 307–333.


      Wang, S., & Zhou, C. (2012). Hierarchical modular structure enhances the robustness of self-organized criticality in neural

         networks. New Journal of Physics, 14(2), 023005.


      Wang, X. R., Lizier, J. T., & Prokopenko, M. (2011). Fisher information at the edge of chaos in random boolean networks.

         Artificial life, 17(4), 315–329.


                                                                  –62–
                                                           == D R A F T         ==
                Journal: NETWORK NEUROSCIENCE              /    Title: Theoretical foundations of studying criticality in the brain
Authors: Yang Tian and Zeren Tan and Hedong Hou and Guoqi Li and Aohua Cheng and Yike Qiu and Kangyu Weng and Chun Chen and Pei Sun




      Williams-Garcı́a, R. V., Moore, M., Beggs, J. M., & Ortiz, G. (2014). Quasicritical brain dynamics on a nonequilibrium

         widom line. Physical Review E, 90(6), 062714.


      Wilting, J., & Priesemann, V. (2019). Between perfectly critical and fully irregular: A reverberating model captures and

         predicts cortical spike propagation. Cerebral Cortex, 29(6), 2759–2770.


      Wolf, F. (2005). Symmetry, multistability, and long-range interactions in brain development. Physical review letters, 95(20),

         208701.


      Yaghoubi, M., de Graaf, T., Orlandi, J. G., Girotto, F., Colicos, M. A., & Davidsen, J. (2018). Neuronal avalanche dynamics

         indicates different universality classes in neuronal cultures. Scientific reports, 8(1), 1–11.


      Yang, G., & Schoenholz, S. (2017). Mean field residual networks: On the edge of chaos. Advances in neural information

         processing systems, 30.


      Yu, S., Klaus, A., Yang, H., & Plenz, D. (2014). Scale-invariant neuronal avalanche dynamics and the cut-off in size

         distributions. PloS one, 9(6), e99761.


      Zhigalov, A., Arnulfo, G., Nobili, L., Palva, S., & Palva, J. M. (2015). Relationship of fast-and slow-timescale neuronal

         dynamics in human meg and seeg. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(13), 5385–5396.




                                                                    –63–
