                                             Cite as: Jiang, L. P., & Rao, R. P. N. (2022). Predictive coding theories of cortical function. In Oxford Research
                                                       Encyclopedia of Neuroscience. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190264086.013.328




                                                           Predictive Coding Theories of Cortical Function
                                                                        Linxing Preston Jiang1, 2, 3 and Rajesh P. N. Rao∗1, 2, 3
                                                1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
                                                                       2 Center for Neurotechnology, University of Washington
                                                              3 Computational Neuroscience Center, University of Washington




arXiv:2112.10048v3 [q-bio.NC] 19 May 2023
                                                                                  {prestonj,rao}@cs.washington.edu




                                                                                                    Summary

                                                      Predictive coding is a unifying framework for understanding perception, action and neocortical organiza-
                                                  tion. In predictive coding, different areas of the neocortex implement a hierarchical generative model of the
                                                  world that is learned from sensory inputs. Cortical circuits are hypothesized to perform Bayesian inference
                                                  based on this generative model. Specifically, the Rao-Ballard hierarchical predictive coding model assumes that
                                                  the top-down feedback connections from higher to lower order cortical areas convey predictions of lower-level
                                                  activities. The bottom-up, feedforward connections in turn convey the errors between top-down predictions
                                                  and actual activities. These errors are used to correct current estimates of the state of the world and generate
                                                  new predictions. Through the objective of minimizing prediction errors, predictive coding provides a functional
                                                  explanation for a wide range of neural responses and many aspects of brain organization.


                                            Keywords: Bayesian inference, predictive coding, perception, hierarchy, neocortex, internal model, sparse cod-
                                            ing, Kalman filtering, attention, free energy principle, active inference, endstopping, visual cortex, prediction
                                            errors

                                            Subjects: Computational Neuroscience



                                            Contents

                                            Introduction                                                                                                             2


                                            Predictive Coding Models: An Overview                                                                                    5

                                               Generative Model of Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          5

                                                     Sparse Coding as a Special Case of Predictive Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            6

                                                     Hierarchical Predictive Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6

                                                     Network Dynamics and Synaptic Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              8

                                                     Feedforward Perception as the Initial Inference Step in Predictive Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . .             8

                                               Prediction in Time: Spatiotemporal Predictive Coding and Kalman Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               9
                                              ∗ Corresponding Author




                                                                                                         1
         Prediction and Internal Simulation in the Absence of Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         9

         Attention and Robust Predictive Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     10

         What-Where Predictive Coding Networks and Equivariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             11

         Predictive Coding and the Free Energy Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      12

         Action-Based Predictive Coding and Active Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        13


Predictive Coding in the Visual System                                                                              14

   Predictive Coding in Early Stages of Visual Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14

   Predictive Coding in the Visual Cortex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15

   Endstopping and Contextual Effects as Prediction Error Minimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          15

   A Common Misconception About the Predictive Coding Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             18

   Neuroanatomical Implementation of Predictive Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18


Empirical Evidence for Predictive Coding                                                                            19

   Internal Representation Neurons and Prediction Error Neurons in the Cortex . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           19

   Layer 2/3 Neurons as Top-Down Bottom-Up Signal Comparators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             22


Discussion                                                                                                          25


Acknowledgement                                                                                                     26



Introduction

A normative theory for understanding perception is that the brain uses an internal model of the external world
to infer the hidden causes of its sensory inputs and maintain beliefs about these causes. In the early work of
Gregory et al. (1980), perception was defined as hypothesis testing, emphasizing the process of inferring expla-
nations for sensory inputs. The notion that perception is an inference process based on internal models (rather
than a purely bottom-up feature-extracting process) is well exemplified by the phenomenon of binocular rivalry
(Tong et al., 2006). Binocular rivalry occurs when conflicting monocular images are presented separately to
each of the two eyes (Figure 1A) Instead of perceiving a stable mixture or superposition of the two stimuli, the
subject perceives exclusively the object or feature in one of the two distinct images presented to each eye, with
perception alternating between the two images every few seconds. Such “rivalry” challenges the traditional
stimulus-driven feature-extraction view of perception – why would perception alternate between two interpre-
tations if the process is completely bottom-up, given that the stimulus does not change? When perception is
viewed as forming hypotheses to infer the hidden causes of images, binocular rivalry can be understood as the
brain entertaining two competing hypotheses to explain a conflicting sensory input.

Having an internal model of the environment also helps disambiguate sensory inputs with multiple interpre-
tations. Figure 1B shows an example: the two footprints on the right appear to be convex (oriented upward
towards the viewer) while the two on the left appear to be concave (oriented downward away from the viewer).
However, the image on the right is the same as the image on the left, only rotated 180 degrees. The two different
interpretations of the footprints arise from the brain using a “light-from-above” prior assumption (Sun & Per-
ona, 1998): the brain’s internal model assumes that light sources tend to be above the observer, an ecologically
valid assumption. Such assumptions are necessary because visual perception is an ill-posed problem: multiple


                                                          2
           A




           B




Figure 1: Bayesian perception. (A) Example stimuli (dichoptic orthogonal gratings) presented to the left and
right eye simultaneously that induce binocular rivalry. Subjects perceive exclusively one of the two grating
orientations, with perception switching between the two orientations every few seconds. Adapted from Tong
et al. (2006). (B) An illustration of the effects of the light-from-above prior assumption that the brain appears to
use in 3D visual perception of a 2D image. The image of the two footprints on the right is a 180 degree rotation
of the image on the left, but the perception of the shape of the footprints is markedly different. Adapted from
Ernst and Luca (2011).




                                                         3
3D configurations can give rise to the same 2D image due to the projection of the 3D world onto a 2D retina,
making assumptions such as “light-from-above” necessary for inferring properties of visual objects. Note that
the observer is typically not aware of such prior assumptions but rather, they are incorporated by the neural
circuits subconsciously to compute beliefs over hidden causes through the dynamics of neural activities (thereby
implementing perception as “unconscious inference”). As part of the internal model, such priors can be expected
to be adapted to the environment that the organism lives in.

How can neural circuits in the cortex learn internal models of the world, and how can such circuits combine prior
beliefs with sensory evidence for Bayesian inference? Predictive coding offers a possible neural implementation.
The predictive coding model of Rao and Ballard (1999) assumes that the areas comprising the cortical hierarchy
(Felleman & Van Essen, 1991; Hubel & Wiesel, 1959) implement a hierarchical generative model of the sensory
world. The neural activities at each level of the hierarchy represent the brain’s internal belief of the hidden
causes of the stimuli at a particular abstraction level (e.g., edges, object parts, objects). Furthermore, the model
assumes that the top-down feedback connections from higher to lower order cortical areas convey predictions
of lower-level activities. The bottom-up feedforward connections in turn convey prediction errors, calculated
as the difference between the top-down predictions and actual activities. The neural activities at each level
representing the beliefs about the hidden causes are jointly influenced by both the top-down predictions and
the bottom-up error signals. Overall, the model assumes the goal of the cortex is to minimize prediction errors
across all levels. Importantly, the above neural operations can be interpreted within a Bayesian framework: the
top-down predictions convey prior beliefs based on learned expectations while the bottom-up prediction errors
carry evidence from the current input. Predictive coding combines these two sources of information, weighted
according to their reliability (inverse variances or “precisions”), to compute the posterior beliefs over hidden
causes at each level. The objective of minimizing prediction errors across all levels can thus be shown to be
equivalent to finding the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates of the hidden causes.

The phrase “predictive coding” was originally used to capture a form of efficient coding. The center-surround
receptive fields and biphasic temporal antagonism in responses of cells in the retina and lateral geniculate nucleus
(LGN) can be interpreted as performing decorrelation through a simple form of predictive coding: rather than
conveying the local intensity directly, retinal and LGN cells can be interpreted as sending the differences (errors)
between the local intensity and a prediction of that intensity computed as a linear weighted sum of nearby values
in space and preceding input values in time (Dong & Atick, 1995b; Huang & Rao, 2011; Srinivasan et al., 1982).
In auditory information processing, Smith and Lewicki (2006) used the same efficient coding principle to derive
a model which yields kernels (filter weights) that closely match auditory filters.

More broadly, predictive coding can be viewed as Bayesian inference in the context of Rao and Ballard’s hier-
archical predictive coding model (Rao & Ballard, 1997, 1999). This model was originally proposed to explain
extra-classical receptive field effects and contextual modulation. More recent models inspired by predictive cod-
ing have demonstrated that a network trained to predict future inputs can explain a number of other cortical
properties (Lotter et al., 2020; Singer et al., 2018). Beyond the cortex, the idea of computing errors between top-
down predictions and lower-level inputs is consistent with theories of the cerebellum (Bell et al., 1997; Wolpert
et al., 1998) and models of dopamine responses as reward prediction errors (Schultz et al., 1997). These examples
suggest that the general principle of predictive coding could be a widely applicable and flexible algorithmic strat-
egy implemented by the brain across different regions to support perception, motor control, and reward-based
learning.

Empirical evidence for prediction and prediction error signals in the cortex has been growing at a fast pace.
Neural responses corresponding to prediction errors induced by visual mismatches during self-generated loco-
motion have been discovered in layer 2/3 of the primary visual cortex (V1) in rodents (Fiser et al., 2016; Keller
et al., 2012). Predictive signals have been found in V1 when an animal is adapted to visual-locomotion coupling
in a virtual environment (Fiser et al., 2016). The cortex also learns to predict novel auditory stimuli coupled to an
animal’s locomotion and once learned, suppresses the responses to the learned stimuli in primary auditory cor-
tex (Schneider et al., 2018), consistent with prediction error minimization. More recent studies (Jordan & Keller,
2020) have found some support for the distinct computational roles of the laminar structure of cortical columns
proposed by predictive coding theories. Recent research has also found that unexpected stimuli which induce
large prediction error signals can drive synaptic learning in neural circuits (Gillon et al., 2021), as expected in a
predictive coding circuit that uses prediction errors to learn a generative model of the world.

This review is organized as follows. The section “Predictive Coding Models: An Overview” introduces the Rao-
Ballard predictive coding model (Rao & Ballard, 1999) and several related models, as well as the relationship to


                                                         4
the free energy principle and active inference. The section “Predictive Coding in the Visual System” discusses
the application of hierarchical predictive coding to the visual cortex, explaining classical and extra-classical re-
ceptive field effects in V1 in terms of prediction error minimization, followed by a review of experimental studies
investigating predictive coding in the neocortex in the section “Empirical Evidence for Predictive Coding”. The
final section discusses open questions pertaining to predictive coding and potential future directions.



Predictive Coding Models: An Overview

The predictive coding model of Rao & Ballard begins with the assumption that sensory inputs are being generated
by hidden states or “causes” in the external world via an unknown generative model. The goal of the brain then
is to learn this generative model over many inputs. Perception, for any given sensory input I, involves inverting
this generative model, that is, estimating the hidden states or causes of input I given a learned generative model.
Neural activities in the predictive coding model are assumed to represent estimates of the hidden state (also
known as the latent variable) vector as estimated by the predictive coding neural network, given the observed
sensory input vector I. The prior distribution of hidden states is assumed to be 𝑝 (r), which imposes a constraint
on neural activities such as sparse activation. The observation model 𝑝 (I|r) is the likelihood that input I is
generated given the cause or hidden state r. The predictive coding model assumes that 𝑝 (I|r) is parameterized
by a matrix U, which is assumed to be learned and encoded in the “top-down” synaptic weights of the network.
Inference and learning correspond respectively to estimating r (equivalent to perception) and learning an estimate
U (corresponding to synaptic learning), both with the goal of maximizing the joint probability 𝑝 (I, r). Since 𝑝 (I)
is constant, this is equivalent to maximizing the posterior probability 𝑝 (r|I), also known as maximum a posteriori
(MAP) inference.


Generative Model of Images

In the predictive coding model, the likelihood 𝑝 (I|r) is governed by the following equation, which relates the
hidden state r to the input I via a function 𝑓 and a matrix U:

                                                   I = 𝑓 (Ur) + n.                                             (2.1)

Here, n is assumed to be zero mean Gaussian noise with covariance 𝜎 2 I (I is the identity matrix). This equation
states that the input is assumed to be generated as a linear combination of the columns of matrix U weighted by
the elements of r, followed by a function 𝑓 and additive noise. The function 𝑓 is a linear or nonlinear function
(e.g., identity function, rectification function, or a sigmoidal function). The columns of U can be regarded as the
“basis” vectors (e.g., edges or “parts” of an image or scene) that can be used to compose an input according to
the values in the hidden “causes” vector r. Given Equation 2.1 and the fact that n is zero mean Gaussian, the
negative logarithm of the likelihood 𝑝 (I|r) can be shown to be proportional to:
                                     1                     1
                              𝐻1 =      kI − 𝑓 (Ur) k 22 = 2 (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) > (I − 𝑓 (Ur)),                      (2.2)
                                     𝜎2                   𝜎
               √︃Í
where kxk 2 =           2
                     𝑖 𝑥𝑖 denotes the Euclidean or 𝐿2 norm of vector x. 𝐻 1 is the sum of squared errors between the
image I and its reconstruction (or “prediction”) 𝑓 (Ur) across all pixels, weighted by the inverse noise variance
(or precision) 𝜎12 . The predictive coding model also allows prior probability distributions 𝑝 (r) and 𝑝 (U) for the
parameters r and U, respectively. Taking these priors into account, we obtain the overall optimization function:

                                                    𝐻 = 𝐻1 + 𝐻2                                                (2.3)

with

                                                 𝐻 2 = 𝑔(r) + ℎ(U),                                            (2.4)

where 𝑔(r) and ℎ(U) are proportional to the negative logarithms of 𝑝 (r) and 𝑝 (U), respectively. If one assumes
that both prior distributions are zero mean Gaussians with inverse variances 𝛼 and 𝜆, respectively, one obtains:

                                                               𝑟 2𝑗 + 𝜆    𝑈𝑖2𝑗 .
                                                            ∑︁          ∑︁
                                      𝐻 2 = 𝑔(r) + ℎ(U) = 𝛼                                                  (2.5)
                                                               𝑗          𝑖,𝑗


                                                           5
Minimizing the overall optimization function 𝐻 is thus equivalent to MAP estimation. Predictive coding min-
imizes this objective function using both inference (of r) and learning (of U). Inference of r is implemented by
a recurrent neural network that performs gradient descent on 𝐻 with respect to r for each input. Remarkably,
rather than being chosen a priori, the architecture of the predictive coding neural network is predicted from first
principles by the gradient descent equations for optimizing 𝐻 with respect to r (see “Network Dynamics and
Synaptic Learning” section for details). The matrix U is represented by the synaptic weights of the same network
and learned through gradient descent on 𝐻 with respect to U across many inputs.


Sparse Coding as a Special Case of Predictive Coding

The sparse coding model of Olshausen and Field (1996) for learning simple cell-like receptive fields can be re-
garded as a special case of the predictive coding model described above. In their model, the choice of the like-
lihood 𝑝 (I|r) remains the same as above, but the prior 𝑝 (r) for the hidden state (causes) r is assumed to be a
heavy-tailed distribution such as a Laplace distribution. Such a prior encourages sparsity in r (majority of the
elements of r are zero or close to zero). Their model does not explicitly assume any specific prior for the synaptic
weights U. The inference and learning processes are almost identical to those for a single-level predictive cod-
ing model (see “Network Dynamics and Synaptic Learning” section). When applied to natural image patches,
their model produces localized, orientation-selective receptive fields (columns of U) similar to those of V1 simple
cells, compared to using a Gaussian prior, which produces more global receptive fields. Such a sparseness prior
promotes statistical independence in the output and encourages efficiency by selecting only a small subset of
features to encode information (Barlow, 1961; Olshausen & Field, 1996, 1997). The underlying assumption here
is that objects in the natural world are composed of a wide variety of features (or parts) but any given object
is composed of only a small subset of them. This is consistent with the view that the brain evolved to adopt
ecologically useful priors for learning its neural representations in its quest to learn an internal model of the
world appropriate for the organism’s ecological niche.


Hierarchical Predictive Coding

The above-described generative model can be extended to multiple hierarchical levels by assuming that the hid-
den state can be generated by a higher-level representation rℎ , corresponding to more abstract image properties
than the lower-level representation:

                                           r = r𝑡𝑑 + n𝑡𝑑 = 𝑓 (Uℎ rℎ ) + n𝑡𝑑 ,                                   (2.6)

where r𝑡𝑑 = 𝑓 (Uℎ rℎ )is the top-down prediction of r and n𝑡𝑑 is zero mean Gaussian noise with variance 𝜎𝑡𝑑   2 . The

lower-level neurons have smaller receptive fields and represent a local image region by estimating the hidden
state r. The higher-level neurons estimate their state rℎ based on several lower-level hidden states r associated
with local image patches. This arrangement results in a progressive convergence of inputs from lower to higher
levels and an increase in receptive field size as one ascends the hierarchical network, until the receptive fields of
the highest-level neurons span the entire input image.

The overall optimization function for the hierarchical predictive coding model is:
                  1                                1
            𝐻=     2
                     (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) > (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) + 2 (r − r𝑡𝑑 ) > (r − r𝑡𝑑 ) + 𝑔(r) + 𝑔(rℎ ) + ℎ(U) + ℎ(Uℎ ),   (2.7)
                 𝜎                                𝜎𝑡𝑑

where 𝑔(rℎ ) and ℎ(Uℎ ) are terms proportional to the negative logarithm of the priors for rℎ and Uℎ respectively.
Minimizing 𝐻 is again equivalent to maximizing the posterior 𝑝 (r, rℎ , U, Uℎ |I). Perceptual inference involves
minimizing 𝐻 with respect to r and rℎ jointly, and learning involves minimizing 𝐻 with respect to U and Uℎ .
Note that the first level state r is now conditioned on the second level state rℎ and synaptic weights Uℎ , but an
additional prior constraint such as sparseness may be placed on r as well (the 𝑔(r) term).




                                                           6
    A




    B




    C




Figure 2: Hierarchical Predictive Coding Model. (A) The general architecture of the hierarchical predictive
coding model. Each predictive estimator (PE) module maintains an internal representation, generates top-down
prediction (lower arrows, feedback), and receives bottom-up prediction errors (upper arrows, feedforward). (B)
Components of a PE module. Feedforward connections carry bottom-up prediction errors from the lower level.
Feedback connections deliver top-down predictions to the lower level. The internal representation neurons
correct their current estimate r using both the bottom-up prediction error and the top-down prediction error.
A separate class of error-detecting neurons compute the discrepancy between the current estimate and its top-
down prediction, and send the error to the higher level. (C) An example two-level hierarchical network. Three
image patches at Level 0 are processed separately by three Level 1 PE modules. These three Level 1 modules
converge to provide input (prediction errors) to a single Level 2 module, which attempts to predict the states r in
all three of these Level 1 PE modules. This convergence effectively increases the receptive field size of neurons
as one ascends the hierarchy.



                                                        7
Network Dynamics and Synaptic Learning

Given the hierarchical generative model above, a MAP estimate of r can be obtained using gradient descent on
𝐻 with respect to r:
                        dr    𝑘 1 𝜕𝐻   𝑘1   𝜕𝑓 >                𝑘1        𝑘
                                                                               1
                           =−        = 2 U>      (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) + 2 r𝑡𝑑 − r − 𝑔 0 (r),                    (2.8)
                        d𝑡     2 𝜕r   𝜎      𝜕x                𝜎𝑡𝑑            2

where 𝑘 1 is a positive constant governing the rate of descent toward a minimum for 𝐻 , x = Ur, and 𝑔 0 is the
derivative of 𝑔 with respect to r. A discrete time implementation of the above-mentioned dynamics leads to the
following update equation for r at each time step (represented by neural activities or firing rates):
                                   𝑘1     𝜕𝑓 >                       𝑘1                𝑘
                                                                                           1 0
                     r̂𝑡 = r̂𝑡 −1 + 2 U>        (I − 𝑓 (Ur̂𝑡 −1 )) + 2 r𝑡𝑑𝑡 −1 − r̂𝑡 −1 −   𝑔 (r̂𝑡 −1 ) . (2.9)
                                   𝜎     𝜕x𝑡 −1                     𝜎𝑡𝑑                   2


This equation, derived from first principles, specifies recurrent network dynamics for hierarchical predictive
coding in terms of how the firing rate (or neural response) vector at a given level should be updated over time.
At each time step, the neural activity vector r is multiplied by the feedback matrix U and a new prediction is
generated for the lower level (Figure 2A and Figure 2B). This prediction is then subtracted from the lower-level
representation I to generate the bottom-up error (I − 𝑓 (Ur)), which is filtered by the feedforward weights U>
and the gradient of the function 𝑓 . Note that the bottom-up synaptic weights are the transpose of the top-down
synaptic weights in this model, although this assumption can be relaxed using an approach similar to the one used
in variational autoencoders (VAEs) (see “Predictive Coding and the Free Energy Principle” section). The neural
response vector r is updated based on a weighted combination of the bottom-up prediction error (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) and
the top-down prediction error r𝑡𝑑 − r) (Figure 2B). Each error is weighted by the inverse of the corresponding
noise variance: The larger the noise variance, the smaller the weight given to that error term, consistent with
the concept of Kalman filtering (see section “Prediction in Time: Spatiotemporal Predictive Coding and Kalman
Filtering”).

The learning rule for the feedback synaptic weights U (and feedforward weights U> ) is obtained by using gradient
descent on 𝐻 with respect to U:
                                 dU    𝑘 2 𝜕𝐻  𝑘 2 𝜕𝑓 >
                                    =−        = 2       (I − 𝑓 (Ur))r> − 𝑘 2 𝜆U,                             (2.10)
                                 d𝑡    2 𝜕U 𝜎 𝜕x
where 𝑘 2 is a positive parameter determining the learning rate of the network and x = Ur. Note that this
learning rule is a form of Hebbian plasticity: for the feedforward weights U> , the input presynaptic activity is
                                              d𝑓 >
the residual error (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) (weighted by dx ) and the output postsynaptic activity is r. More importantly,
unlike backpropagation, the learning rule above is local since the feedforward connection explicitly conveys the
prediction error at each level. To ensure stability, learning of synaptic weights operates on a slower time scale
than the dynamics of r: The learning rate 𝑘 2 is a much smaller value than the rate 𝑘 1 governing the dynamics
of the network. For static inputs, this implies that the network responses r converge to an estimate for the
current input before the synaptic weights U are updated based on this converged estimate. An example two-
level hierarchical network is depicted in Figure 2C.


Feedforward Perception as the Initial Inference Step in Predictive Coding

How does the traditional feedforward “bucket brigade” model of perception, where inputs are processed se-
quentially in one area and passed on to the next (e.g., LGN →V1 →V2 . . . ), align with the hierarchical predictive
coding view of cortical processing? The answer to this question is easy to obtain from Equation 2.9 by consid-
ering what happens in the very first time step 𝑡 = 1 when r̂0 = 0 and the two top-down prediction terms 𝑓 (Ur̂0
and r𝑡𝑑 are also both 0. In this case, if 𝑔 0 (0) is also 0, Equation 2.9 reduces to:
                                                        𝑘 1 > 𝜕𝑓 >
                                                r̂𝑡 =      U        I.                                       (2.11)
                                                        𝜎2   𝜕x𝑡 −1
Thus, the first feedforward pass through the network multiplies the input I with the feedforward weights U>
(besides the other multiplicative factors). Assuming this happens at all patches of an image, this equation de-
scribes exactly the type of operation implemented by a standard feedforward layer where the filters are given


                                                           8
by the rows of U> . In the other words, for a static input, if the top-down predictions are assumed to be zero,
a hierarchical predictive coding network (e.g., Figure 2C) initializes its estimates at all levels in the same man-
ner as a deep neural network via a feedforward pass through all layers, before proceeding to further minimize
prediction errors by generating top-down predictions from these initial estimates and refining them based on
prediction errors.


Prediction in Time: Spatiotemporal Predictive Coding and Kalman Filtering

The model described thus far focused on learning and predicting static inputs. But the world is dynamic – most of
the time, animals receive time-varying stimuli either due to their own movement or due to other moving objects
in the environment. This makes the ability to predict future stimuli essential for survival (e.g., predicting the
location of predators). The predictive coding framework can be extended to include temporal predictions (Rao,
1999; Rao & Ballard, 1998). Specifically, the network dynamics derived above for predictive coding implements
a nonlinear and hierarchical form of Bayesian inference that can be related to the classic technique of Kalman
filtering (Kalman, 1960). This relationship becomes clear when we augment the spatial generative model in
Equation 2.1 with the ability to model the temporal dynamics of hidden state r from time step 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1:

                                                  r𝑡 +1 = V𝑡 r𝑡 + m𝑡 ,                                         (2.12)

where V𝑡 is a (potentially time-varying) transition matrix and m𝑡 is zero mean Gaussian noise. Equation 2.12
models how a hidden state in the world, for example, the location of a predator, changes over time by assuming
that the next state depends only on the current state (“Markov” assumption) plus some noise. Making the weights
V𝑡 time-varying allows the equation to capture nonlinear transition dynamics.

Combining Equation 2.1 with Equation 2.12 and assuming the function 𝑓 is the identity function, one can derive
the following equations for the network dynamics:

                                      Prediction: r̄𝑡 = V𝑡 r𝑡 −1
                                     Correction: r̂𝑡 = r̄𝑡 + N𝑡 U> G𝑡 (I𝑡 − Ur̄𝑡 ),                            (2.13)

where N𝑡 and G𝑡 are gain terms that depend on the (co-)variances of m in Equation 2.12 and n in Equation 2.1
(see Rao (1999) for the derivation). The prediction equation takes the current estimate of the state and generates
a prediction of the next state r̄𝑡 via the matrix V𝑡 . The correction equation corrects this prediction r̄𝑡 by adding
to it the prediction error (I𝑡 − Ur̄𝑡 ) weighted by gain terms N𝑡 and G𝑡 , with the matrix U> translating the error
from the image space back to the more abstract state space of r. The gain terms N𝑡 and G𝑡 could potentially
depend on task-dependent factors and can be regarded as “attentional modulation” of the prediction error (see
section “Attention and Robust Predictive Coding”) (Rao, 1998). The above equations implement a Kalman filter
(see Rao (1999)).

Figure 3 illustrates a neural network implementing the spatiotemporal predictive coding model given by Equa-
tion 2.13: the network uses local recurrent (lateral) connections V to make a prediction r̄𝑡 for the next time
step, translates the prediction to the lower level as Ur̄𝑡 via feedback connections, conveys the prediction error
(I𝑡 − Ur̄𝑡 ) via feedforward connections, and then corrects its state prediction r̄𝑡 with prediction error weighted
by the gain term G.


Prediction and Internal Simulation in the Absence of Inputs

The spatiotemporal predictive coding model allows for the possibility that the organism or agent might want to
perform internal simulations of the dynamics of the external world (e.g., for planning) by predicting how future
states evolve given a starting state (and possibly actions). This can be done by setting the input prediction error
gain term G𝑡 in Equation 2.13 to zero (see also the relationship to attention below). This results in the following
network dynamics for a single-level network:

                                                      r̄𝑡 = V𝑡 r̂𝑡 −1                                          (2.14)
                                                      r̂𝑡 = r̄𝑡 .                                              (2.15)



                                                             9
Figure 3: Spatiotemporal predictive coding model. The network is similar to the predictive coding model
in Figure 2 in terms of the feedback and feedforward pathways conveying prediction and prediction error, re-
spectively, but the spatiotemporal model additionally utilizes local recurrent synapses (lateral connections) to
generate the prediction for the next time step. Based on Rao (1999).


In this case, the network ignores any inputs and simply predicts future states moving forward in time using the
learned state transition dynamics V𝑡 . The network thus acts as a recurrent network, with a possibly time-varying
set of recurrent weights V𝑡 to model nonlinear transitions.

For a hierarchical network, the network dynamics becomes (based on Equation 2.9):
                                                              
                                           r̂𝑡 = r𝑡 + 𝛼 r𝑡𝑑
                                                         𝑡 − r𝑡 ,                                             (2.16)

where 𝛼 is the weight assigned to the prediction r𝑡𝑑 𝑡 from the higher level. Here, the network combines a local
recurrent prediction r̄𝑡 at one level with a prediction r𝑡𝑑
                                                          𝑡 from a higher level (using the weights (1 − 𝛼) and 𝛼
respectively), allowing higher levels to guide the predictions at the lower levels during internal simulation, while
ignoring external inputs.


Attention and Robust Predictive Coding

The Rao-Ballard predictive coding model can be extended to model top-down attention using a robust optimiza-
tion function as first proposed in Rao (1998). Specifically, instead of using the squared error loss function
                                     1                     1
                              𝐻1 =      kI − 𝑓 (Ur) k 22 = 2 (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) > (I − 𝑓 (Ur)),                     (2.17)
                                     𝜎2                   𝜎
the robust predictive coding model uses

                                                𝐻 1𝑅 = 𝜌 (I − 𝑓 (Ur)),                                        (2.18)

where 𝜌 is a function that reduces the influence of outliers (large prediction errors) in the estimation of r. As an
example, 𝜌 could be defined in terms of a diagonal matrix S as follows (Rao, 1998):
                                               1
                                        𝐻𝑅 =      (I − 𝑓 (Ur)) > S(I − 𝑓 (Ur)),                               (2.19)
                                               𝜎2
where the diagonal entries 𝑆𝑖𝑖 determine the weight accorded to the prediction error at input location 𝑖: (𝐼𝑖 −
𝑓 (u𝑖 r)) 2 where u𝑖 denotes the 𝑖th row of U (u𝑖 here is a row vector). A simple but attractive choice for these
weights is the nonlinear function given by:
                                                                         
                                                               𝑐
                                          𝑆𝑖𝑖 = min 1,                      ,                               (2.20)
                                                        (𝐼𝑖 − 𝑓 (u𝑖 r)) 2

where 𝑐 is a threshold parameter. This function has the following desirable effect: S clips the squared prediction
error for the 𝑖th input location to a constant value 𝑐 if (𝐼𝑖 − 𝑓 (u𝑖 r)) 2 exceeds the threshold 𝑐.


                                                          10
Figure 4: Robust predictive coding and attention. Left panel: The robust predictive coding model utilizes a
gain or gating term to modulate the prediction errors before they are fed to the predictive estimator network
that estimates the state vector r. This allows the network to filter out any outliers dynamically as a function
of the current top-down hypothesis, allowing the network to “focus attention” and test its hypothesis. Right
panel: The top row shows images of two objects the network was trained on. The middle row illustrates how the
network can filter out occluders and background objects as outliers, recovering an estimate of a training object
(the duck). The bottom row shows how, when presented with an image containing both training objects, the
network can sequentially focus and recognize each object.


Minimizing the robust optimization function 𝐻 𝑅 leads to the following equation for robust predictive coding:
                                                                  d𝑓 >
                                      r̂𝑡 = r̂𝑡 −1 + 𝑘 1 U> G𝑡          (I − 𝑓 (Ur̂𝑡 −1 )) ,                       (2.21)
                                                                 dx𝑡 −1
where G𝑡 is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries at time constant 𝑡 are given by 𝐺𝑖𝑖 = 0 if (𝐼𝑖 − 𝑓 (u𝑖 r̂𝑡 −1 )) 2 >
𝑐𝑡 and 1 otherwise. Here, 𝑐𝑡 is a potentially time-varying threshold on the squared prediction error.

The gain G𝑡 acts as an “attentional filter” for outlier detection and filtering, allowing the predictive coding net-
work estimating r (Figure 4, left panel) to suppress large prediction errors in parts of the input containing outliers.
This enables the network to focus on verifying the feasibility of its current best hypothesis by trying to mini-
mize prediction errors while ignoring outliers. Robust predictive coding thus allows the network to “focus its
attention” on one object while ignoring occluders and background objects, and even “switch attention” from one
object to another (Figure 4, right panel) (see Rao (1998, 1999)).


What-Where Predictive Coding Networks and Equivariance

The predictive coding models above do not consider the fact that many natural inputs, such as videos, are gener-
ated by the same object or feature undergoing specific transformations such as translations, rotations, and scal-
ing. The predictive coding model has been extended to account for such transformations using “What-Where”
predictive coding (Rao & Ballard, 1998) and related models that learn transformations based on Lie groups (Miao
& Rao, 2007; Rao & Ruderman, 1998) and bilinear models (Grimes & Rao, 2005).

The What-Where predictive coding model is shown in Figure 5. It employs two networks to explain a new input
I(x): one network, called the “What” network, is similar to the original predictive coding network discussed
above and estimates the features or object present in the image via the state vector r; the other network, called
the “Where” network, estimates the transformation x in the new input relative to a previous (canonical) input
I(0). The network architecture and the dynamics of how r and x are updated are both derived from first principles
through prediction error minimization (Rao & Ruderman, 1998).


                                                                 11
Figure 5: What-Where predictive coding networks. Two networks jointly minimize prediction error: one
network estimates object features/identity (“What”) while the other estimates transformations (“Where”) relative
to a canonical representation.


The What-Where predictive coding network was one of the first neural networks to demonstrate equivariance:
the representation of an object in the “What” network remains stable and invariant by virtue of having a sec-
ond network, the “Where” network, which absorbs changes in the input stream by modeling these changes as
transformations of a canonical representation (Rao & Ballard, 1998) (cf. the more recent line of research on equiv-
ariance using “capsule” networks (Hinton et al., 2011; Kosiorek et al., 2019; Sabour et al., 2017). The What-Where
predictive coding model contrasts with traditional deep neural networks which utilize pooling in successive
layers to achieve invariance to transformations but at the cost of losing information about the transformations
themselves.

While its architecture is derived from the principle of prediction error minimization, the What-Where predictive
coding model shares similarities with the ventral-dorsal visual processing pathways in the primate visual cortex,
where ventral cortical areas have been implicated in object-related processing (“What”) and dorsal cortical areas
have been implicated in motion- and spatial-transformation-related processing (“Where”).


Predictive Coding and the Free Energy Principle

Predictive coding and the principle of prediction error minimization are closely related to variational inference
and learning, which form the basis for VAEs in machine learning research (Dayan et al., 1995; Kingma & Welling,
2014) as well as the free energy principle in neuroscience as proposed by Friston and colleagues (Friston, 2005,
2010; Friston & Kiebel, 2009). This relationship is briefly summarized below.

MAP inference, as employed in the predictive coding model above, finds an estimate that maximizes the posterior
distribution 𝑝 (r|I). Variational inference aims to find the full posterior distribution instead of a point estimate.
Applying Bayes’ rule:

                                                  𝑝 (I|r)𝑝 (r)    𝑝 (I|r)𝑝 (r)
                                      𝑝 (r|I) =                =∫                .                             (2.22)
                                                      𝑝 (I)       dr𝑝 (I|r)𝑝 (r)


The normalizing factor (denominator) contains multidimensional integrals that are usually intractable to com-
pute (e.g., if 𝑝 (r) is a sparsity-inducing Laplace distribution in sparse coding). Due to this intractability, vari-
ational inference approximates the posterior as follows: the true posterior probability distribution 𝑝𝜃 parame-
terized by parameters 𝜃 is approximated with a more tractable distribution 𝑞𝜑 parameterized by parameters 𝜑.
The “error” between the two distributions is quantified using the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the


                                                           12
posterior probabilities of the latent variable r given the input data I:
                                                               𝑞𝜑 (r|I)
                                              ∫
                                                  𝑞𝜑 (r|I) log           dr
                                          
                     𝐾𝐿 𝑞𝜑 (r|I) k𝑝𝜃 (r|I) =
                                                               𝑝𝜃 (r|I)
                                                               𝑞𝜑 (r|I)
                                              ∫                               ∫
                                            =     𝑞𝜑 (r|I) log           dr +    𝑞𝜑 (r|I) log 𝑝𝜃 (I)dr
                                                               𝑝𝜃 (r, I)
                                                               𝑞𝜑 (r|I)
                                              ∫
                                            =     𝑞𝜑 (r|I) log           dr + log 𝑝𝜃 (I)
                                                               𝑝𝜃 (r, I)
                                            = F + log 𝑝𝜃 (I),                                                   (2.23)

where F is called the “variational free energy” and log 𝑝𝜃 (I) is called the data log likelihood (given model pa-
rameters 𝜃 ) or model evidence. Note that variational free energy F should not be confused with the physical
notion of free energy (e.g., in thermodynamics), although there is a similarity in their definitions.

Rewriting Equation 2.23, we have:

                                         log 𝑝𝜃 (I) = 𝐾𝐿 𝑞𝜑 (r|I) k𝑝𝜃 (r|I) − F
                                                                           

                                                                                                                (2.24)
                                                                           
                                                    = 𝐾𝐿 𝑞𝜑 (r|I) k𝑝𝜃 (r|I) + L,

where L = −F is called the evidence lower bound (or ELBO) in the variational learning and VAE literature since
log 𝑝𝜃 (I) ≥ L (the KL divergence is nonnegative). It can be seen that an organism or artificial agent can increase
model evidence (data log likelihood) by maximizing the ELBO L or equivalently, minimizing variational           free
energy F with respect to the latent state and parameters. Note that since F = 𝐾𝐿 𝑞𝜑 (r|I) k𝑝𝜃 (r|I) −log 𝑝𝜃 (I) and
                                                                                                    
log 𝑝𝜃 (I) does not depend on r or 𝜑, maximizing the ELBO (minimizing F ) with respect to r and 𝜑 is equivalent
to minimizing the KL divergence between the approximating tractable distribution 𝑞 and the true distribution 𝑝.

To make the connection to predictive coding, the definition of variational free energy F used in Equation 2.23
can be rewritten as follows:
                                                   𝑞𝜑 (r|I)
                                 ∫
                             F =   𝑞𝜑 (r|I) log                dr
                                                𝑝𝜃 (I|r)𝑝𝜃 (r)
                                                𝑞𝜑 (r|I)                          1
                                 ∫                            ∫
                               =   𝑞𝜑 (r|I) log          dr +     𝑞𝜑 (r|I) log          dr
                                                 𝑝𝜃 (r)                        𝑝𝜃 (I|r)
                               = 𝐾𝐿(𝑞𝜑 (r|I)||𝑝𝜃 (r)) − E𝑞 [log 𝑝𝜃 (I|r)] .                             (2.25)

Using the relationship in Equation 2.2 for the negative logarithm of 𝑝𝜃 (I|r) and using 𝛼 as the constant of pro-
portionality for Equation 2.2, the free energy for the predictive coding model is given by:

        F = 𝐾𝐿(𝑞𝜑 (r|I)||𝑝𝜃 (r)) − E𝑞 [−𝛼𝐻 1 ]
                                          1
                                                         
          = 𝐾𝐿(𝑞𝜑 (r|I)||𝑝𝜃 (r)) + 𝛼E𝑞 2 kI − 𝑓 (Ur) k 22
                                         𝜎
           = KL divergence between posterior and prior for r + 𝛼 × mean squared prediction error.               (2.26)

Thus, within the predictive coding framework, minimizing the variational free energy F , as advocated by the
free energy principle of brain function (Bogacz, 2017; Friston, 2010), is equivalent to finding an approximating
posterior distribution 𝑞𝜑 that both minimizes prediction errors while also attempting to be close to the prior for
r. This can be regarded as a full-distribution version of the predictive coding model described above, which uses
MAP inference to find an optimal point estimate that minimizes prediction errors while also being constrained
by the negative logarithm of the prior (Equation 2.3).


Action-Based Predictive Coding and Active Inference

Prediction error can be minimized not only by estimating optimal hidden states r (perception) and learning
optimal synaptic weights U and V (internal model learning) but also by choosing appropriate actions. Inferring
actions that minimize prediction error with respect to a goal, or more generally, a prior distribution over future
states, is called active inference (Fountas et al., 2020; Friston et al., 2017; Friston et al., 2011). For example, in
a navigation task, if the objective is to reach a desired goal location by passing through a series of landmarks,


                                                            13
prediction error with respect to the goal and landmarks can be minimized by selecting actions at each time step
that reach each landmark and eventually the goal location. Active inference can be regarded as an example of
“planning by inference” where an internal model is used to perform Bayesian inference of actions that maximize
expected reward or the probability of reaching a goal state (Attias, 2003; Botvinick & Toussaint, 2012; Verma &
Rao, 2005; Verma & Rao, 2006).

Predictive coding allows internal models for action inference to be learned by predicting the sensory conse-
quences of an executed action. For example, babies, even in the womb, make seemingly random movements
called “body babbling” (Rao et al., 2007) that can allow a predictive coding network to learn a mapping between
the current action and the sensory input received immediately after. After learning such an action-based pre-
diction model via prediction error minimization, the model can be unrolled in time into the future to specify a
desired goal state (or states) (see, e.g., Verma and Rao (2005) and Verma and Rao (2006)), and predictive coding-
based inference can used to infer a set of current and future actions most likely to lead to the goal state(s). Some
of the empirical evidence reviewed in the section “Empirical Evidence for Predictive Coding” on visual and au-
ditory predictions based on motor activity can be understood within the framework of action-based predictive
coding.



Predictive Coding in the Visual System

Predictive Coding in Early Stages of Visual Processing

Early “predictive coding” models focused on explaining the center–surround response properties and biphasic
temporal antagonism of cells in the retina (Atick, 1992; Buchsbaum et al., 1983; Meister & Berry, 1999; Srinivasan
et al., 1982) and lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) (Dan et al., 1996; Dong & Atick, 1995b). These models were
derived from the information-theoretic principle of efficient coding (Attneave, 1954; Barlow, 1961) rather than
hierarchical generative models like the Rao-Ballard model. Under the efficient coding hypothesis, the goal of
the visual system is to efficiently represent visual information by reducing redundancy arising from natural
scene statistics (Dong & Atick, 1995a; Field, 1987; Ruderman & Bialek, 1994). A simple example of redundancy
reduction is to remove aspects of an input that are predictable from nearby inputs. Neural activities then only
need to represent information that deviates from the prediction.

Srinivasan et al. (1982) proposed that the spatial and temporal receptive field properties of retinal ganglion cells
are a result of predicting local intensity values in natural images from a linear weighted sum of nearby values in
space or preceding input values in time. Training a linear system that predicts the pixel intensity at a location
from its surrounding pixels produces prediction weights that closely resemble the receptive fields of retinal
ganglion cells (Huang & Rao, 2011; Srinivasan et al., 1982). Thus, the neural activities of retinal ganglion cells
can be seen as representing the “whitened” residual errors that the system cannot predict. Srinivasan et al. also
showed that the linear predictor weights depend on the signal-to-noise (SNR) ratios of visual scenes. Larger
groups of neighboring regions need to be integrated in order to cancel out high statistical noise in low SNR
input, a phenomenon observed by the authors in the fly eye. More recently, Hosoya et al. (2005) showed that
retinal ganglion cells can rapidly adapt to environments with changing correlation structure and become more
sensitive to novel stimuli, consistent with the predictive coding view of the retina.

Similar ideas have been used to cast LGN processing as performing temporal whitening of inputs from the retina
(Atick, 1992; Dan et al., 1996; Dong & Atick, 1995b; Kaplan et al., 1993). Dong and Atick (1995b) derived a linear
model whose objective is to produce decorrelated output in the frequency domain. The optimized spatiotemporal
filter compares remarkably well with the physiological data from the LGN (Saul & Humphrey, 1990). Dan et al.
(1996) confirmed through experiments that the output from the LGN is temporally decorrelated (especially for
lower-frequency 3–15 Hz) for natural stimuli but not white noise, suggesting that the LGN selectively whitens
stimuli that match natural scene statistics. In summary, these results suggest that the early stages of visual
processing (the retina and LGN) are tuned to the statistical properties of the natural environment. The same
insight, implemented via a hierarchical generative model, forms the core of the Rao-Ballard predictive coding
model of the visual cortex.




                                                        14
Predictive Coding in the Visual Cortex

The model presented in “Hierarchical Predictive Coding” was used by Rao and Ballard to explain both classical
and extra-classical receptive fields effects in the visual cortex in terms of prediction error minimization. The cor-
tex is modeled as a hierarchical network in which higher-level neurons predict the neural activities of lower-level
neurons via feedback connections (Figure 2A, lower arrows). A class of lower-level neurons, known as “error
neurons,” compute the differences between the predictions from the higher level and the actual responses at the
lower level, and convey these prediction errors back to the higher level via feedforward connections (Figure 2A,
upper arrows). Except for neurons at the highest level, neural activities at every level are influenced by both
“top-down” predictions and “bottom-up” prediction errors (Figure 2B). Additionally, the network is structured
such that the higher-level neurons make predictions at a larger spatial scale than lower-level neurons; this is
achieved by allowing higher-level neurons to predict the responses of several lower-level modules, resulting in
a combined receptive field larger than any single lower-level neuron’s receptive field (e.g., in Figure 2C, a single
Level 2 module predicts the responses of three Level 1 modules).

The dynamics of the recurrent neural network implementing predictive coding is governed by Equation 2.8
and the synaptic weights are learned using Equation 2.10. When trained on natural image patches (Figure 6,
top panel), the synaptic weights that were learned in the first level resembled oriented spatial filters or Gabor
wavelets similar to the receptive fields of simple cells in V1 while at the second level, the synaptic weights
resembled more complex features that appear to be combinations of several lower-level filters (Figure 6, Level
2).


Endstopping and Contextual Effects as Prediction Error Minimization

Some visual cortical neurons (particularly those in layers 2/3) exhibit the curious property that a strong response
to a stimulus gets suppressed when a stimulus is introduced in the surrounding region whose properties (e.g.,
orientation) match the properties of the stimulus at the center of the receptive field (RF). Such effects, which have
been reported in several cortical areas (Bolz & Gilbert, 1986; Desimone & Schein, 1987; Hubel & Wiesel, 1968), are
known as “extra-classical” receptive field effects or contextual modulation. Hubel and Wiesel named one class of
such cells in area V1 “hypercomplex” cells and noted that these cells exhibit the property of “endstopping”: The
cell’s response is inhibited or eliminated when an oriented bar stimulus in the center of the cell’s RF is extended
beyond its RF to the surrounding region.

Rao and Ballard (1999) suggested that endstopping and related contextual effects could be interpreted in terms
of prediction errors in a network trained for predictive coding of natural images. The responses of neurons
representing prediction errors (e.g., neurons in cortical layers 2/3 that send axons to a “higher” cortical area)
are suppressed when the top-down prediction becomes more accurate because the larger stimulus (e.g., longer
bar) engages higher-level neurons tuned to this stimulus. These neurons generate more accurate predictions for
the lower level, resulting in low prediction errors. When the surrounding context is missing or at odds with
the central stimulus, the prediction error responses are high due to the mismatch between the higher level’s
prediction and the lower-level responses. Rao and Ballard proposed that the tendency for the higher level to
expect similar statistics (e.g., similar orientation) for a central patch and its surrounding region arises from the
statistics of natural images that exhibit such statistical regularities and the fact that the hierarchical predictive
coding network has been trained as a generative model to emulate these statistics.

Figure 7 illustrates the prediction error responses from a two-level predictive coding network trained on natu-
ral images. The error-detecting model neurons at the first level (with firing rates r − r𝑡𝑑 ) display endstopping
similar to cortical neurons (Figure 7B, solid curve): Model neuron responses are suppressed when the bar ex-
tends beyond the classical receptive field (figure 7A, solid curve) as the predictions from the higher level become
progressively more accurate with longer bars. Elimination of predictive feedback causes the error-detecting
neurons to continue to respond robustly to longer bars (Figure 7A, dotted curve). The same model can also ex-
plain contextual effects (Figure 7C): The first-level error detecting neurons show greater responses (solid line)
when the texture stimulus at the center has the same orientation as the stimulus in the surround compared to
an orthogonally oriented surround stimulus (dashed line). Similar contextual effects have been reported in V1
neurons (Zipser et al., 1996). Other V1 response properties such as cross-orientation suppression and orientation
contrast facilitation can also be explained by the predictive coding framework (Spratling, 2008, 2010).



                                                         15
Figure 6: Emergence of visual cortex–like receptive fields in the hierarchical predictive coding model.
Top panel: Natural images used for training the hierarchical model. Several thousand natural image patches
were extracted from these five images. The bottom-right corner shows the size of Level 1 and Level 2 receptive
fields relative to the natural images. Middle two panels: Level 1 and Level 2 feedforward synaptic weights (rows
of U> ) learned from the natural images using a Gaussian prior. Values can be zero (always represented by the
same gray level), negative (inhibitory, black regions), and positive (excitatory, bright regions). These weights
resemble centered oriented Gabor-like receptive fields in Level 1 and in Level 2, various combinations of the
synaptic weights in Level 1. Bottom panel: Localized Gabor filter-like synaptic weights learned in Level 1 using
a sigmoidal nonlinear generative model and a sparse kurtotic prior distribution similar to those used in Olshausen
and Field (1996). Adapted from Rao and Ballard (1999).




                                                       16
             A                                             B




             C




Figure 7: Extra-classical receptive field effects in the hierarchical predictive coding model. (A) Tuning
curve of a first level model neuron for the control case (solid curve) and after ablation of feedback from the
second level (dotted curve). (B) Endstopping in a layer 2/3 complex cell in cat primary visual cortex. Tuning
curves with respect to bar stimulus length are shown for the control case (solid curve) and after inactivation
of layer 6 (dotted curve). (C) Contextual modulation effects. Responses of an error-detecting model neuron for
oriented texture stimuli with center and surround regions having the same (dotted line) versus different (solid
line) orientations. Adapted from Rao and Ballard (1999)




                                                      17
Figure 8: Putative laminar implementation of the Rao-Ballard predictive coding model. A mapping of
the hierarchical predictive coding model components (see Figures 2 and 3) to cortical layers.


In summary, the predictive coding model suggests that (a) the physiological properties of visual cortical neu-
rons are a consequence of statistical learning of an internal model of the natural environment—specifically, the
objective of prediction error minimization allows the cortex to learn a hierarchical generative model of the nat-
ural world; and (b) perception is the process of actively explaining input stimuli by inverting a learned internal
generative model via inference to recover hidden causes of the input. Context effects such as endstopping arise
as a natural consequence of the visual cortex detecting prediction errors or deviations from the expectations
generated by a learned internal model of the natural environment.


A Common Misconception About the Predictive Coding Model

One of the most common misconceptions about the predictive coding model is that the model predicts suppres-
sion of all neural activity when stimuli become predictable. This has led some authors to state that experimental
evidence showing neurons not being suppressed or maintaining persistent firing for predictable inputs contra-
dicts the predictive coding model. On the contrary, the predictive coding model requires a group of neurons to
maintain the internal representation (state estimate r̂) at each hierarchical level for generating predictions for
the lower level (see “Hierarchical Predictive Coding” and Figure 8). Thus, in the predictive coding model, the
neurons that are suppressed when stimuli become predictable are error-detecting neurons that are distinct from
the neurons maintaining the network’s internal representation of the external world. Similar to the efficient cod-
ing models of the retina and LGN (Dong & Atick, 1995b; Srinivasan et al., 1982), redundancy reduction occurs
primarily in the feedforward pathways of the Rao-Ballard predictive coding model, with the feedback pathways
remaining active to convey predictions.


Neuroanatomical Implementation of Predictive Coding

Rao and Ballard (1999) postulated two groups of neurons at each hierarchical level with distinct computational
goals (Figure 8). One group of neurons maintains an internal representation (state estimate) for generating top-
down predictions of lower-level activities. These neurons are hypothesized to be in the deep layers 5/6 of cortical
columns and are predicted by the model to exhibit sustained activity to maintain predictions to lower levels. A
different group of neurons at the same level calculates prediction errors to be conveyed to the next higher level.
These were suggested to be layer 2/3 neurons which send connections to “higher” order cortical areas and which
are expected to exhibit transient activity. Since prediction errors can be positive or negative, Rao and Ballard
(1999) proposed two subclasses of error-detecting neurons, one subclass representing positive errors and another
representing negative errors, similar to on-center off-surround and off-center on-surround neurons in the retina
and LGN.


                                                        18
In general, as seen above in endstopping and other contextual effects, the model predicts that layer 2/3 neurons
are suppressed when the stimuli are predictable (i.e., consistent with natural image statistics) while deeper layer
neurons remain active. Stimuli that deviate from natural image statistics (“novel” stimuli) on the other hand
elicit large responses in layer 2/3 neurons. The model also predicts that prediction error signals are used for
unsupervised learning of the synaptic connections in the predictive coding network, driving the synaptic weights
to better reflect the structure of the input stimuli.



Empirical Evidence for Predictive Coding

Experimental evidence has been mounting for predictive processing in the cortex thanks to advances in neuronal
recording and stimulation techniques such as optical imaging and optogenetics. Particularly relevant to the
hierarchical predictive coding model proposed by Rao and Ballard (1999) are findings of top-down predictive
“internal representation” neurons and bottom-up error-detecting neurons in a cortical column. These findings
appear to suggest that the cortex may indeed be implementing a hierarchical generative model of the natural
world. We briefly review the experimental evidence below.


Internal Representation Neurons and Prediction Error Neurons in the Cortex

The hierarchical predictive coding model predicts the existence of at least two functionally distinct classes of
neurons in the cortex: internal state representation neurons r, which maintain the current estimate of state at
a given hierarchical level and are postulated to reside in the deeper layers 5/6 of the cortex, and error-detecting
neurons r − r𝑡𝑑 in layers 2/3, which compute the difference between the current state estimate and its top-down
prediction from a higher level. Recent studies have provided evidence for both types of neurons in the cortex.

Keller et al. (2012) recorded neural activities from layer 2/3 cells in the monocular visual cortex of behaving
mice that were head-fixed and running on a spherical treadmill. The mice were exposed to 10–30 minutes of
visual feedback as they ran on the treadmill. In normal “feedback” trials, the visual flow stimuli provided to the
mouse were full-field vertical gratings coupled to the mouse’s locomotion on the treadmill. In “mismatch” trials,
visual-locomotion mismatches were delivered randomly as brief visual flow halts (1 second). As a control, the
mice also went through “playback trials” in which visual flow was passively viewed without locomotion.




                                                        19
A




B       C




    C




D        E




F




        20
Figure 9: Evidence for predictive neurons and error-detecting neurons in two visual-locomotion tasks.
(A) Sample fluorescence change (Δ𝐹 /𝐹 ) traces from two cells (black). Green trace: binary indicator of visual flow.
Red trace: binary indicator of locomotion. Gray shading: visual feedback with locomotion. Orange shading:
feedback mismatch (no visual flow with motion). Green shading: playback (visual flow with no motion). White:
baseline. Cell 677 responded predominately to feedback mismatch while cell 452 responded mainly to visual
feedback with locomotion. (B) Average population response to onsets (time=0) of different trials: feedback mis-
match (orange), running (black), playback (green), and passive viewing of playback halts (yellow). (C) Mismatch
responses during various speeds of locomotion. Darker traces represent faster locomotion speed. (D) Schematic
representation of the texture lining both walls of the virtual tunnel that mice ran through. The last block in-
dicates the percentage of appearance of each texture (including omission trials) under different conditions. (E)
Two example neurons’ response traces when the mouse ran through the tunnel. Blue shading represents the
period when the mouse was in Block A, red shading represents Block B. Both neurons are spatially selective
only to Block B, not Block A. The neuron depicted by the black trace showed predictive responses (activation
prior to entering Block B), while the neuron depicted by the gray trace was only responsive after the mouse
entered Block B. (F) left: average population response to omission trials (black dashed) compared to Block A
trials (blue), Block B trials (red), and the 90% Block B5 trials (red dashed). Panel F, right: average responses of
the omission-selective neural population. Adapted from Keller et al. (2012) (Panels A–C) and Fiser et al. (2016)
(Panels D–F).


The authors found that 13.0% of the visual cortical neurons recorded responded predominately to feedback mis-
matches. Figure 9A shows a sample neuron (cell number 677) that responded mainly to mismatch trials (orange
shading). Also, 23.6% of the neurons responded mainly to feedback trials in which visual flow feedback was pre-
dictable (cell number 452 in Figure 9A). The mismatch responses were also significant in the population average
(Figure 9B) and the activity onset in mismatch trials was much stronger than that in the other trials. Furthermore,
the mismatch signals encoded the degree of mismatch – a visual flow halt during faster locomotion resulted in a
stronger response than during slow locomotion (Figure 9C, darker lines denote faster speed at the time of visual
flow halt).

V1 neurons have also been found to be predictive of spatial locations after adapting to a new environment. In
an experiment by Fiser et al. (2016), mice went through a virtual tunnel with blocks of two different grating
patterns (A or B) separated by distinct landmarks. The five trial conditions only differed in the fifth block, where
the grating patterns A and B as well as omission with no visual stimuli had different probabilities of occurring
(see Figure 9D). After adaptation, some neurons developed predictive responses to specific visual stimuli based
on spatial information. As shown in Figure 9E, an example neuron (black trace) showed strong activation before
the mouse perceived Block B (but not Block A). In contrast, another sample neuron (gray trace) showed activation
after entering Block B (but not Block A). The authors also discovered prediction error responses similar to those
reported by Keller et al. (2012). The population average of neural activities during omission trials was much
greater than during A and B trials (Figure 9F, left). Moreover, a subset of neurons (2.3%) developed omission-
selectivity – they showed large responses only to the omission trials (Figure 9F, right).

Other studies have also documented neural responses carrying predictive information. Xu et al. (2012) found
that after rats adapted to a visual moving dot trajectory, a brief flash at the starting point of the same trajectory
triggered the same sequential firing pattern in the rat’s V1 as evoked by the full-sequence stimulus. Similarly,
Gavornik and Bear (2014) discovered that after an animal is exposed to a sequence of stimuli during training, V1
regenerates the sequential response even when certain elements of the sequence are omitted.

Prediction and prediction error-like signals have also been found in cortical areas in the human visual cortex (e.g.,
S. O. Murray et al. (2002)) and the hierarchical face processing region of the monkey inferior temporal cortex (IT)
(Freiwald & Tsao, 2010; Tsao et al., 2006). Schwiedrzik and Freiwald (2017) exposed macaque monkeys to fixed
pairs of face images with different head orientations and identities such that the successor face image can be
predicted from the preceding face image. Neurons in the lower-level face area ML (middle lateral section of the
superior temporal sulcus) displayed large responses when the pair association was violated (either in identity,
or head orientation, or both). Furthermore, prediction errors resulting from view violation (head orientation)
diminished and eventually vanished during the late phase of responses while those resulting from identity vio-
lation remained significant. This is consistent with the interpretation that the top-down predictive signals from
the view-invariant neurons in higher-level anterior lateral and anterior medial areas suppress the view mismatch
responses (encoded locally in the lower-level ML area), while identity-related mismatch signals are propagated
through feedforward circuits for further processing. In another study, Issa et al. (2018) used different face-part


                                                         21
configuration stimuli (typical versus atypical) and found that the lower-level areas of the hierarchy (posterior IT
and central IT) signal deviations of their preferred features from the expected configurations, whereas the top
level (anterior IT) maintained a preference for natural, frontal face-part configuration. The authors further dis-
covered that the early responses in central IT and anterior IT are correlated with late responses in posterior IT:
Images that produced large responses in higher-level areas early are followed by reduced activities in lower-level
areas, consistent with top-down predictions signal subduing lower-level responses.

In another experiment, Choi et al. (2018) showed that a hierarchical inference model could explain the effect of
feedback signals from the prefrontal cortex to intermediate visual cortex V4 as top-down predictions of partially
occluded shapes.

Schneider et al. (2018) explored the effects of learning on prediction error-like activity in the primary auditory
cortex. Rats were given artificial auditory feedback coupled to their locomotion: The pitch of the sound was
proportional to the rat’s running speed. They found that a group of neurons in the rat’s primary auditory cortex
initially responded strongly to the artificial auditory feedback (“reafferent sound”) but over the course of several
days, the neuronal circuits learned to suppress this activity. The suppression occurred whenever the reafferent
sound was coupled to the rat’s locomotion and did not occur when a nonreafferent sound was played or when
the reafferent sound was played during resting. The gradual suppression of responses is consistent with how
the predictive coding model learns an internal model of the environment: as the network learns to predict the
artificial sound coupled to the rat’s locomotion, the predictions get better, resulting in decreasing prediction
errors which manifest as suppression of the auditory neurons’ activities.

The results discussed above provide evidence for predictive neural activity and prediction error-like responses
in the cortex. The Rao and Ballard model additionally postulates that layer 2/3 neurons compute and convey the
prediction errors while neurons in the deeper layers 5/6 maintain the state estimate. Recent experiments have
attempted to test these predictions. While it is hard to distinguish the state estimating “internal representation”
neurons from those driven by bottom-up sensory stimuli (see review by Keller and Mrsic-Flogel (2018) for further
discussions), there is a growing body of evidence suggesting that layer 2/3 neurons may indeed play a role in
comparing bottom-up information and top-down predictions.


Layer 2/3 Neurons as Top-Down Bottom-Up Signal Comparators

For biological networks to use prediction errors to correct their estimate, both positive and negative errors need
to be represented. At any input location, a positive prediction error ((I − Ur > 0)) occurs when the input is not
predicted (or incorrectly predicted) while a negative prediction error ((I − Ur < 0)) occurs when a predicted
input is omitted. Rao and Ballard (1999) postulated that layer 2/3 in the cortex may employ two different groups
of neurons, one to convey positive errors and another for negative errors, similar to on-center, off-surround and
off-center, on-surround ganglion cells in the retina (Srinivasan et al., 1982).

To test this theory, Jordan and Keller (2020) used an experimental setup similar to the one used in Keller et
al. (2012): mice ran on a treadmill with locomotion-coupled visual flow feedback. Whole-cell recordings were
obtained from both layer 2/3 and layer 5/6 neurons in V1. Visual feedback could be interrupted with a brief flow
halt (1 second) at random times to generate visual-locomotion mismatch events. Out of 32 neurons recorded in
layer 2/3, 17 neurons showed depolarizing activities (Figure 10A, left, depolarizing mismatch (dMM) neurons)
and 6 neurons showed hyperpolarizing activities (Figure 10A, right, hyperpolarizing mismatch (hMM) neurons)
during mismatch trials. These results suggest that the dMM and hMM neurons in layer 2/3 may subserve the
function of encoding positive and negative prediction errors.

In addition, 30% of the neurons exhibited significant correlations between the mismatch responses and the speed
of locomotion (visual halts that occurred during faster locomotion generated “stronger” mismatch signals). The
sign of the correlation was also different between dMM and hMM neurons, with dMM neurons showing a pos-
itive correlation (Figure 10B, left) and hMM neurons showing a negative correlation (Figure 10B, right). These
results are consistent with Keller and colleagues’ calcium imaging study previously discussed Keller et al. (2012)
(Figure 9C), showing that the responses of layer 2/3 neurons could potentially signal the quantitative level of
prediction errors.




                                                        22
A




B




C




D




    23
Figure 10: Comparison of layer 2/3 versus layer 5/6 neurons in the mouse visual cortex. (A) left: Average
membrane potential (Vm) response (top) and firing rate histogram (bottom) during mismatch trials of a layer
2/3 neuron (dMM), showing depolarizing Vm. Orange shading represents the mismatch trial period. The mean
prestimulus voltage is –58mV. Panel A, right: Average Vm of another layer 2/3 neuron (hMM) showing hyperpo-
larizing Vm during mismatch trials. (B), left: An example dMM neuron showing a positive correlation between
response and locomotion speed. Panel B, right: An example hMM neuron showing a negative correlation be-
tween response and locomotion speed. (C) Comparison of average responses between layer 2/3 neurons (light
gray) and layer 5/6 neurons (dark gray) during visual feedback trials (left) and during mismatch trials (right).
(D) Scatter plot of correlation coefficients between the membrane potential of the neurons and visual flow speed
(x-axis) or locomotion speed (y-axis). The dot color denotes the membrane potential change in response in mis-
match trials. The gray dashed line is the fitted linear regression line to the data. Solid lines represent the average
responses of dMM neurons (red), hMM neurons (turquoise), and unclassified neurons (gray). Panel D shows
layer 2/3 neurons (left) and layer 5/6 neurons (right). Adapted from Jordan and Keller (2020).


Jordan and Keller (2020) also investigated the differences between the responses of layer 2/3 neurons and deeper
layer 5/6 neurons during normal visual feedback trials and mismatch trials. A much lower ratio of neurons in
layers 5/6 (5 out of 14) responded predominately to mismatch trials. Additionally, larger activity during mismatch
trials was rare (1 neuron), with 7 neurons exhibiting reduced activities. The difference in responses between
superficial and deep layer neurons was significant in mismatch trials (Figure 10C, right) but not in normal visual
flow trials (Figure 10C, left). To further characterize the influence of visual flow and locomotion on layer 2/3
neurons versus layer 5/6 neurons, correlations between the activities of these neurons and locomotion speed or
visual flow speed were calculated. As seen in Figure 10D (left plot), the distribution of correlations in layer 2/3
was bimodal: Activities of most dMM neurons were positively correlated with locomotion speed and negatively
correlated with visual flow speed (and vice versa for hMM neurons). On the other hand, activities of layer 5/6
neurons were mostly positively correlated with both locomotion speed and visual flow speed (Figure 10D, right).
These results suggest that layer 2/3 neurons are well-suited to computing the error between the locomotion-
generated predictions of visual inputs and the actual visual input, whereas the deeper layer 5/6 neurons may
integrate top-down predictions (here, from motor areas) and bottom-up input to compute an estimate of the
state at the current hierarchical level.

The difference in neural responses to expected versus unexpected visual flows in layer 2/3 versus layer 5 was also
confirmed in a recent study by Gillon et al. (2021). The authors used an open-loop experiment (no sensorimotor
coupling to locomotion) with stimuli consisting of moving squares. Expectation violations were created in some
trials by making 25% of the visual squares move in the opposite direction compared to the other 75%. The
authors found that somatic and distal apical dendritic populations in layer 5 did not exhibit significantly different
responses to expected versus unexpected visual flow, whereas both layer 2/3 somatic and distal apical dendritic
populations showed a significant difference in responses. Additionally, this difference increased over days of
exposure. Gillon et al. also found learning effects when mice were exposed to Gabor sequence stimuli for
several consecutive days. The responses to unexpected stimuli (in this case, novel Gabor stimuli replacing an
expected stimulus in a sequence) were predictive of how these responses evolve in subsequent sessions on a cell-
by-cell basis. Besides implicating layer 2/3 neuron in prediction error computation, these results further confirm
that the neural responses to unexpected stimuli (i.e., prediction errors) can drive learning in neural circuits, an
important computational prediction of the predictive coding model (Rao & Ballard, 1999) (see Equation 2.10).

The larger distribution of error detecting neurons in superficial layers than deep layers was also confirmed by
Hamm et al., 2021 in awake mice with visual oddball paradigms. The authors additionally showed that optoge-
netic suppression of prefrontal inputs to V1 reduced the contextual selectivity of the error detecting neurons,
consistent with the effect of top-down signals in the predictive coding model. Finally, through laminar local field
potential recordings in monkeys, Bastos et al. (2020) showed that predictability of visual stimuli affects neural
activities in the superficial and deep layers differently—during predictable trials, there was an enhancement of
alpha and beta power in the deep layers of the cortex whereas during unpredictable trials, an increase in spiking
and gamma power was observed in the superficial layers.




                                                         24
Discussion

By casting Bayesian inference and learning in terms of minimizing prediction errors based on an internal model
of the world, predictive coding provides a unifying view of perception and learning. Perception is equated with
Bayesian inference of hidden states of the world and proceeds by forming predictive hypotheses about inputs
that are corrected based on prediction errors. Learning corresponds to using the inferred states to build an
internal model of the world that minimizes prediction errors through synaptic plasticity. Actions can further
minimize prediction errors with respect to future goals via active inference.

The hierarchical predictive coding model (Rao & Ballard, 1999) assumes that the hierarchical structure of the
cortex forms predictive hypotheses at multiple levels of abstractions to explain input data. The model postulates
that feedback connections between cortical areas convey predictions of expected neural activity from higher to
lower levels, while the feedforward connections convey the prediction errors back to the higher level to correct
the neural activity at that level, characteristics that differentiate hierarchical predictive coding from other cortical
models (Heeger, 2017; Lee & Mumford, 2003).

Early empirical support for the hierarchical predictive coding model was based on its ability to explain extra-
classical receptive field effects such as endstopping and other contextual modulation of responses in the visual
cortex in terms of prediction error minimization (Rao & Ballard, 1999). Rao and Ballard proposed that neurons in
layer 2/3 exhibiting such effects can be interpreted as error-detecting neurons whose responses are suppressed
when the properties of stimuli in the center of the receptive field can be predicted by stimuli in the surround,
following natural image statistics. Several recent experimental studies have discovered neurons in the visual
and auditory cortex that encode predictions or prediction errors in a variety of sensory-motor tasks (Fiser et
al., 2016; Keller et al., 2012; Schneider et al., 2018). Some studies have tested more detailed neuroanatomical
predictions such as the role of cortical layer 2/3 neurons in error computation (Jordan & Keller, 2020). Others
have shown that these error-related neural activities can drive learning in synaptic connections (Gillon et al.,
2021). Although further tests are required, the experimental results reviewed above support the hypothesis that
the cortex implements a predictive model of the world, uses this model to generate predictions, and utilizes
prediction errors to both correct its moment-to-moment estimates and to learn a better model of the world.

There remain many aspects of predictive coding that require further exploration and experimental corroboration.
For example, are layer 5/6 neurons computing and maintaining the hidden state as specified by Equation 2.8?
Are the inverse variances in Equation 2.8 (“precisions” terms in the free energy principle; see Friston (2010))
computed in the cortex? If so, how are they used to weigh the bottom-up and top-down terms in the predictive
coding network dynamics (Equation 2.8)? How is this “precision”-based weighting related to attention and
robust predictive coding (Rao, 1998, 1999)? More broadly, can “what-where” predictive coding networks be
made hierarchical and be used to understand visual processing in the ventral and dorsal streams of the visual
cortex?

Spatiotemporal hierarchical predictive coding is another area worthy of further study. Palmer et al. (2015) de-
rived a model by solving the information bottleneck problem (Tishby et al., 2000) and suggested that retinal
ganglion cells may signal predictive information about the future states of the environment, a result recently
confirmed by Liu et al. (2021). Rao (1999) presented a single-level Kalman filtering model for predicting inputs
one time-step ahead based on learning linear transition dynamics from input sequences. These models, how-
ever, do not address hierarchical representation of temporal information. Experimental evidence suggests that
cortical representations exhibit a hierarchy of timescales from lower-order to higher-order areas across both
sensory and cognitive regions (J. D. Murray et al., 2014; Runyan et al., 2017; Siegle et al., 2021). Recent work by
the authors (Jiang et al., 2021) suggests that a hierarchical predictive coding model based on dynamic synaptic
connections (via “hypernetworks”) can learn visual cortical space-time receptive fields and hierarchical temporal
representations from natural video sequences. Ongoing work is focused on exploring the connections between
such learned temporal representations and response properties in different cortical areas.

The original predictive coding model of Rao and Ballard described how a hierarchical network can converge to
maximum a posteriori estimates of hidden states at different hierarchical levels. Although the model included
variances for the top-down and bottom-up errors, it did not explicitly represent uncertainty. The Kalman filter
version of predictive coding (Rao, 1999) does represent uncertainty in terms of a Gaussian posterior distribution,
but whether the cortex can compute covariance matrices (or just the diagonal variances) remains unclear. Other
theories of how the brain may represent uncertainty and perform Bayesian inference using population coding


                                                          25
and sampling (Echeveste et al., 2020; Huang & Rao, 2016; Orbán et al., 2016; Rao, 2004, 2005) are complementary
to predictive coding and the connections between these theories remain to be worked out.

Finally, there is much to be explored in relating predictive coding to cognition, memory, and behavior. Several
studies have shown that prediction errors (or “surprise”-related signals) can drive memory reactivation and re-
consolidation (Bein et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2014; Rust & Palmer, 2021; Sinclair & Barense, 2019), suggesting a role
for error signals in memory updating, but the connections to predictive coding theories remain unclear. Friston
and colleagues have made important contributions in establishing some of these connections (Friston, 2010; Fris-
ton et al., 2017) through the free energy principle and active inference (see the section “Predictive Coding and
the Free Energy Principle”). Empirical studies such as those reviewed above have demonstrated the close links
between predictive coding and active behaviors such as locomotion. We expect future predictive coding theories
to incorporate actions, attention, memory, and planning. Together with new tools such as Neuropixels probes
(Jun et al., 2017; Steinmetz et al., 2021) for large-scale recordings and optogenetics for stimulation, predictive
coding theories can enable new paradigms for theory-driven experimentation in neuroscience.



Acknowledgement

This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (contract num-
ber HR001120C0021); the National Institute of Mental Health (grant number 5R01MH112166); the National Sci-
ence Foundation (grant number EEC-1028725); and a grant from the Templeton World Charity Foundation. The
opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
funders. The authors would like to thank Ares Fisher, Dimitrios Gklezakos, and Samantha Sun for suggestions,
discussions, and manuscript edits.



References
Atick, J. J. (1992). Could information theory provide an ecological theory of sensory processing? Network: Com-
          putation in Neural Systems, 3(2), 213–251. https://doi.org/10.1088/0954-898X 3 2 009
Attias, H. (2003). Planning by Probabilistic Inference. International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
          tics, 9–16.
Attneave, F. (1954). Some informational aspects of visual perception. Psychological Review, 61(3), 183–193. https:
          //doi.org/10.1037/h0054663
Barlow, H. B. (1961). Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages. Sensory communi-
          cation, 1(01).
Bastos, A. M., Lundqvist, M., Waite, A. S., Kopell, N., & Miller, E. K. (2020). Layer and rhythm specificity for
          predictive routing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas .
          2014868117
Bein, O., Duncan, K., & Davachi, L. (2020). Mnemonic prediction errors bias hippocampal states. Nature Commu-
          nications, 11(1), 3451. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17287-1
Bell, C. C., Han, V. Z., Sugawara, Y., & Grant, K. (1997). Synaptic plasticity in a cerebellum-like structure depends
          on temporal order. Nature, 387(6630), 278–281. https://doi.org/10.1038/387278a0
Bogacz, R. (2017). A tutorial on the free-energy framework for modelling perception and learning. Journal of
          Mathematical Psychology, 76, 198–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2015.11.003
Bolz, J., & Gilbert, C. D. (1986). Generation of end-inhibition in the visual cortex via interlaminar connections.
          Nature, 320(6060), 362–365. https://doi.org/10.1038/320362a0
Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(10), 485–488. https:
          //doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.006
Buchsbaum, G., Gottschalk, A., & Barlow, H. B. (1983). Trichromacy, opponent colours coding and optimum
          colour information transmission in the retina. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Bio-
          logical Sciences, 220(1218), 89–113. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.1983.0090
Choi, H., Pasupathy, A., & Shea-Brown, E. (2018). Predictive Coding in Area V4: Dynamic Shape Discrimination
          under Partial Occlusion. Neural Computation, 30(5), 1209–1257. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco a 01072
Dan, Y., Atick, J. J., & Reid, R. C. (1996). Efficient Coding of Natural Scenes in the Lateral Geniculate Nucleus:
          Experimental Test of a Computational Theory. Journal of Neuroscience, 16(10), 3351–3362. https://doi.
          org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-10-03351.1996


                                                           26
Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R. M., & Zemel, R. S. (1995). The Helmholtz Machine. Neural Computation, 7(5),
           889–904. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1995.7.5.889
Desimone, R., & Schein, S. J. (1987). Visual properties of neurons in area V4 of the macaque: Sensitivity to stimulus
           form. Journal of Neurophysiology, 57(3), 835–868. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1987.57.3.835
Dong, D. W., & Atick, J. J. (1995a). Temporal decorrelation: A theory of lagged and nonlagged responses in the
           lateral geniculate nucleus. Network: Computation in neural systems, 6(2), 159–178. https://doi.org/10.
           1088/0954-898X 6 2 003
Dong, D. W., & Atick, J. J. (1995b). Statistics of natural time-varying images. Network: Computation in Neural
           Systems, 6(3), 345–358. https://doi.org/10.1088/0954-898X 6 3 003
Echeveste, R., Aitchison, L., Hennequin, G., & Lengyel, M. (2020). Cortical-like dynamics in recurrent circuits
           optimized for sampling-based probabilistic inference. Nature Neuroscience, 23(9), 1138–1149. https : / /
           doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-0671-1
Ernst, M. O., & Luca, M. D. (2011). Multisensory Perception: From Integration to Remapping. Sensory Cue Inte-
           gration. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195387247.003.0012
Felleman, D. J., & Van Essen, D. C. (1991). Distributed Hierarchical Processing in the Primate Cerebral Cortex.
           Cerebral Cortex, 1(1), 1–47. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/1.1.1
Field, D. J. (1987). Relations between the statistics of natural images and the response properties of cortical cells.
           JOSA A, 4(12), 2379–2394. https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.4.002379
Fiser, A., Mahringer, D., Oyibo, H. K., Petersen, A. V., Leinweber, M., & Keller, G. B. (2016). Experience-dependent
           spatial expectations in mouse visual cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 19(12), 1658–1664. https://doi.org/10.
           1038/nn.4385
Fountas, Z., Sajid, N., Mediano, P., & Friston, K. (2020). Deep active inference agents using Monte-Carlo methods.
           Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 11662–11675.
Freiwald, W. A., & Tsao, D. Y. (2010). Functional Compartmentalization and Viewpoint Generalization Within the
           Macaque Face-Processing System. Science, 330(6005), 845–851. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1194908
Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
           Sciences, 360(1456), 815–836. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1622
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
           https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active Inference: A Process Theory.
           Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49. https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO a 00912
Friston, K., & Kiebel, S. (2009). Predictive coding under the free-energy principle. Philosophical Transactions of
           the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1521), 1211–1221. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0300
Friston, K., Mattout, J., & Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and active inference. Biological Cybernetics,
           104(1), 137–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-011-0424-z
Gavornik, J. P., & Bear, M. F. (2014). Learned spatiotemporal sequence recognition and prediction in primary
           visual cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 17(5), 732–737. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3683
Gillon, C. J., Pina, J. E., Lecoq, J. A., Ahmed, R., Billeh, Y., Caldejon, S., Groblewski, P., Henley, T. M., Kato, I.,
           Lee, E., Luviano, J., Mace, K., Nayan, C., Nguyen, T., North, K., Perkins, J., Seid, S., Valley, M., Williford,
           A., . . . Zylberberg, J. (2021). Learning from unexpected events in the neocortical microcircuit. https :
           //doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.15.426915
Gregory, R. L., Longuet-Higgins, H. C., & Sutherland, N. S. (1980). Perceptions as hypotheses. Philosophical Trans-
           actions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological Sciences, 290(1038), 181–197. https://doi.org/10.1098/
           rstb.1980.0090
Grimes, D. B., & Rao, R. P. N. (2005). Bilinear Sparse Coding for Invariant Vision. Neural Computation, 17(1),
           47–73. https://doi.org/10.1162/0899766052530893
Hamm, J. P., Shymkiv, Y., Han, S., Yang, W., & Yuste, R. (2021). Cortical ensembles selective for context. Proceedings
           of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(14). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2026179118
Heeger, D. J. (2017). Theory of cortical function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(8), 1773–
           1782. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1619788114
Hinton, G. E., Krizhevsky, A., & Wang, S. D. (2011). Transforming Auto-Encoders. In T. Honkela, W. Duch, M.
           Girolami, & S. Kaski (Eds.), Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning – ICANN 2011 (pp. 44–51).
           Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-21735-7 6
Hosoya, T., Baccus, S. A., & Meister, M. (2005). Dynamic predictive coding by the retina. Nature, 436(7047), 71–77.
           https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03689
Huang, Y., & Rao, R. P. N. (2011). Predictive coding. WIREs Cognitive Science, 2(5), 580–593. https://doi.org/10.
           1002/wcs.142



                                                           27
Huang, Y., & Rao, R. P. N. (2016). Bayesian Inference and Online Learning in Poisson Neuronal Networks. Neural
           Computation, 28(8), 1503–1526. https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO a 00851
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1959). Receptive fields of single neurones in the cat’s striate cortex. The Journal of
           Physiology, 148(3), 574–591.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1968). Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey striate cortex. The
           Journal of Physiology, 195(1), 215–243. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1968.sp008455
Issa, E. B., Cadieu, C. F., & DiCarlo, J. J. (2018). Neural dynamics at successive stages of the ventral visual stream
           are consistent with hierarchical error signals (E. Connor, E. Marder, & E. Connor, Eds.). eLife, 7, e42870.
           https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.42870
Jiang, L. P., Gklezakos, D. C., & Rao, R. P. N. (2021). Dynamic Predictive Coding with Hypernetworks. bioRxiv,
           2021.02.22.432194. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.22.432194
Jordan, R., & Keller, G. B. (2020). Opposing Influence of Top-down and Bottom-up Input on Excitatory Layer
           2/3 Neurons in Mouse Primary Visual Cortex. Neuron, 108(6), 1194–1206.e5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
           neuron.2020.09.024
Jun, J. J., Steinmetz, N. A., Siegle, J. H., Denman, D. J., Bauza, M., Barbarits, B., Lee, A. K., Anastassiou, C. A.,
           Andrei, A., Aydın, Ç., Barbic, M., Blanche, T. J., Bonin, V., Couto, J., Dutta, B., Gratiy, S. L., Gutnisky,
           D. A., Häusser, M., Karsh, B., . . . Harris, T. D. (2017). Fully integrated silicon probes for high-density
           recording of neural activity. Nature, 551(7679), 232–236. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24636
Kalman, R. E. (1960). A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Journal of Basic Engineering,
           82(1), 35–45. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3662552
Kaplan, E., Mukherjee, P., & Shapley, R. (1993). Information filtering in the lateral geniculate nucleus. In R.
           Shapley & D.-K. Lam (Eds.), Contrast sensitivity (pp. 183–200). MIT Press.
Keller, G. B., Bonhoeffer, T., & Hübener, M. (2012). Sensorimotor Mismatch Signals in Primary Visual Cortex of
           the Behaving Mouse. Neuron, 74(5), 809–815. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.040
Keller, G. B., & Mrsic-Flogel, T. D. (2018). Predictive Processing: A Canonical Cortical Computation. Neuron,
           100(2), 424–435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.10.003
Kim, G., Lewis-Peacock, J. A., Norman, K. A., & Turk-Browne, N. B. (2014). Pruning of memories by context-
           based prediction error. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(24), 8997–9002. https://doi.
           org/10.1073/pnas.1319438111
Kingma, D. P., & Welling, M. (2014). Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In Y. Bengio & Y. LeCun (Eds.), 2nd
           International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014,
           Conference Track Proceedings.
Kosiorek, A., Sabour, S., Teh, Y. W., & Hinton, G. E. (2019). Stacked Capsule Autoencoders. Advances in Neural
           Information Processing Systems, 32.
Lee, T. S., & Mumford, D. (2003). Hierarchical Bayesian inference in the visual cortex. JOSA A, 20(7), 1434–1448.
           https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.20.001434
Liu, N., Li, S., Du, Y., Tenenbaum, J., & Torralba, A. (2021). Learning to Compose Visual Relations. Advances in
           Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 23166–23178.
Lotter, W., Kreiman, G., & Cox, D. (2020). A neural network trained for prediction mimics diverse features of
           biological neurons and perception. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(4), 210–219. https://doi.org/10.1038/
           s42256-020-0170-9
Meister, M., & Berry, M. J. (1999). The Neural Code of the Retina. Neuron, 22(3), 435–450. https://doi.org/10.1016/
           S0896-6273(00)80700-X
Miao, X., & Rao, R. P. N. (2007). Learning the Lie Groups of Visual Invariance. Neural Computation, 19(10), 2665–
           2693. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2007.19.10.2665
Murray, J. D., Bernacchia, A., Freedman, D. J., Romo, R., Wallis, J. D., Cai, X., Padoa-Schioppa, C., Pasternak, T.,
           Seo, H., Lee, D., & Wang, X.-J. (2014). A hierarchy of intrinsic timescales across primate cortex. Nature
           Neuroscience, 17(12), 1661–1663. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3862
Murray, S. O., Kersten, D., Olshausen, B. A., Schrater, P., & Woods, D. L. (2002). Shape perception reduces activity
           in human primary visual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(23), 15164–15169.
           https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.192579399
Olshausen, B. A., & Field, D. J. (1996). Emergence of simple-cell receptive field properties by learning a sparse
           code for natural images. Nature, 381(6583), 607–609. https://doi.org/10.1038/381607a0
Olshausen, B. A., & Field, D. J. (1997). Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy employed by V1?
           Vision Research, 37(23), 3311–3325. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0042-6989(97)00169-7
Orbán, G., Berkes, P., Fiser, J., & Lengyel, M. (2016). Neural Variability and Sampling-Based Probabilistic Repre-
           sentations in the Visual Cortex. Neuron, 92(2), 530–543. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.038



                                                          28
Palmer, S. E., Marre, O., Berry, M. J., & Bialek, W. (2015). Predictive information in a sensory population. Proceed-
           ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(22), 6908–6913. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1506855112
Rao, R. P. N. (1998). Correlates of Attention in a Model of Dynamic Visual Recognition. Advances in Neural
           Information Processing Systems.
Rao, R. P. N. (1999). An optimal estimation approach to visual perception and learning. Vision Research, 39(11),
           1963–1989. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0042-6989(98)00279-X
Rao, R. P. N. (2004). Bayesian Computation in Recurrent Neural Circuits. Neural Computation, 16(1), 1–38. https:
           //doi.org/10.1162/08997660460733976
Rao, R. P. N. (2005). Bayesian inference and attentional modulation in the visual cortex. NeuroReport, 16(16),
           1843–1848. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.wnr.0000183900.92901.fc
Rao, R. P. N., & Ballard, D. H. (1997). Dynamic Model of Visual Recognition Predicts Neural Response Properties
           in the Visual Cortex. Neural Computation, 9(4), 721–763. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.4.721
Rao, R. P. N., & Ballard, D. H. (1998). Development of localized oriented receptive fields by learning a translation-
           invariant code for natural images. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 9(2), 219–234. https://doi.
           org/10.1088/0954-898X 9 2 005
Rao, R. P. N., & Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional interpretation of some
           extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1), 79–87. https://doi.org/10.1038/4580
Rao, R. P. N., & Ruderman, D. (1998). Learning Lie Groups for Invariant Visual Perception. Advances in Neural
           Information Processing Systems, 11.
Rao, R. P. N., Shon, A. P., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). A Bayesian model of imitation in infants and robots. In
           C. L. Nehaniv & K. Dautenhahn (Eds.), Imitation and Social Learning in Robots, Humans and Animals:
           Behavioural, Social and Communicative Dimensions (pp. 217–248). Cambridge University Press.
Ruderman, D. L., & Bialek, W. (1994). Statistics of natural images: Scaling in the woods. Physical Review Letters,
           73(6), 814–817. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.73.814
Runyan, C. A., Piasini, E., Panzeri, S., & Harvey, C. D. (2017). Distinct timescales of population coding across
           cortex. Nature, 548(7665), 92–96. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23020
Rust, N. C., & Palmer, S. E. (2021). Remembering the Past to See the Future. Annual Review of Vision Science, 7(1),
           349–365. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-vision-093019-112249
Sabour, S., Frosst, N., & Hinton, G. E. (2017). Dynamic Routing Between Capsules. Advances in Neural Information
           Processing Systems, 30.
Saul, A. B., & Humphrey, A. L. (1990). Spatial and temporal response properties of lagged and nonlagged cells
           in cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Neurophysiology, 64(1), 206–224. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.
           1990.64.1.206
Schneider, D. M., Sundararajan, J., & Mooney, R. (2018). A cortical filter that learns to suppress the acoustic
           consequences of movement. Nature, 561(7723), 391–395. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0520-5
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997). A Neural Substrate of Prediction and Reward. Science, 275(5306),
           1593–1599. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.275.5306.1593
Schwiedrzik, C. M., & Freiwald, W. A. (2017). High-Level Prediction Signals in a Low-Level Area of the Macaque
           Face-Processing Hierarchy. Neuron, 96(1), 89–97.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.09.007
Siegle, J. H., Jia, X., Durand, S., Gale, S., Bennett, C., Graddis, N., Heller, G., Ramirez, T. K., Choi, H., Luviano, J. A.,
           Groblewski, P. A., Ahmed, R., Arkhipov, A., Bernard, A., Billeh, Y. N., Brown, D., Buice, M. A., Cain,
           N., Caldejon, S., . . . Koch, C. (2021). Survey of spiking in the mouse visual system reveals functional
           hierarchy. Nature, 592(7852), 86–92. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-03171-x
Sinclair, A. H., & Barense, M. D. (2019). Prediction Error and Memory Reactivation: How Incomplete Reminders
           Drive Reconsolidation. Trends in Neurosciences, 42(10), 727–739. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2019.08.
           007
Singer, Y., Teramoto, Y., Willmore, B. D., Schnupp, J. W., King, A. J., & Harper, N. S. (2018). Sensory cortex
           is optimized for prediction of future input (J. L. Gallant & S. Kastner, Eds.). eLife, 7, e31557. https :
           //doi.org/10.7554/eLife.31557
Smith, E. C., & Lewicki, M. S. (2006). Efficient auditory coding. Nature, 439(7079), 978–982. https://doi.org/10.
           1038/nature04485
Spratling, M. W. (2008). Reconciling Predictive Coding and Biased Competition Models of Cortical Function.
           Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.10.004.2008
Spratling, M. W. (2010). Predictive coding as a model of response properties in cortical area V1. The Journal of
           Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 30(9), 3531–3543. https://doi.org/10.
           1523/JNEUROSCI.4911-09.2010




                                                             29
Srinivasan, M. V., Laughlin, S. B., & Dubs, A. (1982). Predictive coding: A fresh view of inhibition in the retina.
          Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences, 216(1205), 427–459. https://doi.
          org/10.1098/rspb.1982.0085
Steinmetz, N. A., Aydin, C., Lebedeva, A., Okun, M., Pachitariu, M., Bauza, M., Beau, M., Bhagat, J., Böhm, C.,
          Broux, M., Chen, S., Colonell, J., Gardner, R. J., Karsh, B., Kloosterman, F., Kostadinov, D., Mora-Lopez, C.,
          O’Callaghan, J., Park, J., . . . Harris, T. D. (2021). Neuropixels 2.0: A miniaturized high-density probe for
          stable, long-term brain recordings. Science, 372(6539), eabf4588. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abf4588
Sun, J., & Perona, P. (1998). Where is the sun? Nature Neuroscience, 1(3), 183–184. https://doi.org/10.1038/630
Tishby, N., Pereira, F. C., & Bialek, W. (2000). The information bottleneck method. arXiv:physics/0004057.
Tong, F., Meng, M., & Blake, R. (2006). Neural bases of binocular rivalry. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(11),
          502–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.09.003
Tsao, D. Y., Freiwald, W. A., Tootell, R. B. H., & Livingstone, M. S. (2006). A Cortical Region Consisting Entirely
          of Face-Selective Cells. Science, 311(5761), 670–674. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1119983
Verma, D., & Rao, R. P. (2005). Goal-Based Imitation as Probabilistic Inference over Graphical Models. Advances
          in Neural Information Processing Systems, 18.
Verma, D., & Rao, R. P. N. (2006). Planning and Acting in Uncertain Environments using Probabilistic Inference.
          2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2382–2387. https://doi.org/10.
          1109/IROS.2006.281675
Wolpert, D. M., Miall, R. C., & Kawato, M. (1998). Internal models in the cerebellum. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
          2(9), 338–347. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(98)01221-2
Xu, S., Jiang, W., Poo, M.-m., & Dan, Y. (2012). Activity recall in a visual cortical ensemble. Nature Neuroscience,
          15(3), 449–455. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3036
Zipser, K., Lamme, V. A. F., & Schiller, P. H. (1996). Contextual Modulation in Primary Visual Cortex. Journal of
          Neuroscience, 16(22), 7376–7389. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-22-07376.1996




                                                          30
